---
title: Kicking off 2024
date: 2024-01-02T09:54:20-04:00
tags:
- predictions
categories:
- predictions
draft: false
---

Time to kick off 2024. I closed out 2023 the way I usually do - going
to be early but I didn't start 2024 with a run like last year. I'm
still nursing a broken toe and it'll be a couple more weeks before I'm
cleared for full activity.

I won't make any predictions on what's to come in CS Education in 2024
but I thought I'd share a few things I'd be looking at.

The hot topic in and out of education last year was AI and that looks
to continue throughout 2024. For general education the issue will be
cheating on one side an how to leverage the technology on the
other. For CS an interesting twist will be how teachers deal with AI
enhanced programming environments. The interesting questions will be
not only be how we either limit or enable to the tools but also we'll
probably see the start of a long term conversation as to what it means
to teach programming. Nothing huge will change in this coming year but
issues like the importance or lack thereof of understanding algorithms
and data structures as opposed to using AI completion will start to
surface as AI IDEs become more commonplace. Of course, in addition to
the technical AI issues, the ethical ones ranging from uses to
using private data for training are sure to be hot topics. 

Going back to School programming environments, that's something else
that I'll be looking at. Over the past few years, tools like repl.it
became extremely popular. A few months ago, though, repl.it removed
it's educational features leaving many teachers in the lurch. Repl.it
was a hit because it could work on a chromebook, was free, and had
great classroom features. It turns out that putting ones trust in a
private company's largess was probably not a great idea.

I've always been wary of making my teaching reliant on outside
entities and that's something that I hope the greater CS community
takes more seriously. I get it that many schools have few options -
they have to use chromebooks and only approved software but having a
well educated vocal community would be a start. 

Speaking of educated communities, that's a big one that I'll be
looking at - the preparedness of K12 CS teachers. This has been a drum
I've been banging for a long time and will continue to do so.

I've always believed that K12 CS teachers need to have a decent
background in CS - something like a strong undergrad CS minor that
goes at least a course beyond APCS-A and has some breadth. That's how
I designed Hunter's CS teacher certification program.

It appears, however that I'm not the norm. NYSED created a system by
which CS teachers with no knowledge can continue to teach CS for the
next decade. I wrote about that [[https://cestlaz.github.io/post/soce/][here]]. I've also seen plenty of new
certification programs come online that require no real CS knowledge
in order for the participants to complete the programs.

It's alarming but deep down I think the ship has sailed.

There will be a few pockets of excellence in terms of preparing pre
service teachers and a few deep CS professional development options
out there but we'll more often than not see weak CS accompanied by
tangential education issues.

Right now, I think those will be the things I'll be keeping my eye out
for but who knows. Before ChatGPT hit, AI wasn't on educators radar so
you never know.

