---
title: Thoughts on Affirmative Action
date: 2023-06-29T16:48:27-04:00
tags:
- misc
categories:
- misc
draft: false
--- 

Today our Supreme Court ruled 6-3 to eliminate racial considerations
in admissions decisions or affirmative action.

This will be celebrated by some and reviled by others even though it
probably won't make a huge difference in terms of class makeup at most
"elite" institutions. Given my leanings and who I follow, you can
probably guess which views I'm seeing more of.

The cases that have generally been brought against institutions
implementing affirmative action usually amount to "I was more
qualified than the affirmative action candidate you took" with public
cries of "you're lowering standards."

Could either of these claims hold water?

Let's look at the lowering standards side. Either the accepted
candidate was set up and able to succeed in the school or they are
not. If they weren't, well, that would have come clean long ago given
that we've had affirmative action for a long time. So, it would appear
that these candidates that "got in over me" are able to survive and
thrive. This could be because intuitions like Harvard are much harder
to get in than to graduate from but whatever. Doesn't sound like a
standards issue.

If we want to talk about lowering standards however, how about
athletes that "didn't come here to play school" or legacy admits -
I can think of a couple of recent Presidents who were, well, let's say
not high intellects but somehow attended our "elite"
institutions. Personally, if you eliminate my Stuy grads from the
equation, I've met as many dummies who went to the
Harvards of the world as I've met geniuses. Well connected dummies who
ran in the right circles and went to the right schools but dummies
nonetheless.

What about "I'm more qualified?" Well, schools like Harvard or really
any elite school can pretty much shape their incoming classes however
they'd like. The pool of qualified applicants - students who will go
through four years and graduate successfully - dwarfs the size of the
accepted class. Just looking at Stuy numbers from when I was there,
for every student Harvard accepted, I could point to dozens who would
have fared just as well who were rejected. Now project that
nationally. There's no doubt in my mind that affirmative action
candidates would be easily in the qualified pool.

It made me remember something I read that Malcolm Gladwell once wrote
or said. Something like that Harvard had so many qualified graduates
that if they really cared about being fair, they should take all the
qualified applicants and then select randomly. No athletes, no legacy,
nothing special. Of course, that would never happen.

Now, I get that when you're qualified and aren't accepted you might
want to cry out "unfair" and maybe it is, but it's not unfair because
of an affirmative action candidate. It's unfair because it's arbitrary
and tons of qualified applicants get turned away for no apparent
reason not because of affirmative action.

The end result    today is that colleges are free to keep those legacy
admits, big donor admits, or whatever but heaven help you if you deign
to consider anything to help balance the scales for marginalized
groups or anything to try to help build equity in our country.

Now, I do have one issue with affirmative action. It can be a
distracter. Distract from what? The big picture problem.

Affirmative action can help but the students that they can admit are
qualified to be accepted to these elite institutions. That says that
either they're from situations where they've had available to them
some or all of the advantages that the rich white kids have had or
that they've already rose above the challenges to make themselves
viable candidates. If so, good on them and good for rewarding them but
the issue has to be addressed much earlier.

We have so many issues that have to be resolved with education,
poverty, health care, housing, all of which hits our vulnerable
populations the hardest and until as a nation we decide to address
those we're not truly going to have a fair equitable
society. Unfortunately, a significant portion of our country doesn't
want to solve these problems and injustices.

In the meantime, a handful of students who, well, quite frankly,
deserved to be admitted to Harvard anyway, getting admissions as
affirmative action is nice for them but its no game changer. It's feel
good window dressing.

I'm not saying this to diminish the problems with today's ruling but
we really have to attack the big problems and not just around the
edges. It's like programs like Prep for Prep. Prep for Prep's mission
is to "develop future leaders by creating access for young people of
color to first-rate educational, leadership development and
professional advancement opportunities." They identify individual
students who they feel show promise and get them into elite private
schools (and pay the tuition). Great for those kids but it's a small
number and it doesn't do anything to fix any problems in the system as
a whole.

So, that's my two cents. I'm as angered by today's ruling as the next
person but to me it's a reminder that it's not about getting a few
kids into "elite" institutions. It's about making the all the
institutions "elite."



