---
title: Hosting an AI panel at Stuy
date: 2024-02-09T11:15:47-04:00
tags:
- AI, Stuy, Education
categories:
- AI
draft: false
--- 


Went back to school yesterday. Specifically, I was back at Stuy
running an AI panel discussion for the Stuy HS Alumni Association. I
figured it's time for me to get back in the CS / CS Ed game.

Plans started a few months ago when a member of my Stuy CS family
who's also in the SHSAA board asked about doing something. I was game
but a little apprehensive, mostly because there have been, let's say,
issues with the way the SHSAA had operated in the past. Still, this
was a new board with a new staff so I figured, worth exploring.

Turns out the new Alumni Association ED is a former student of mine so
that rocketed the trust level of the association way up and we were
off to the races.

Setting up any panel or tech event can be tricky. If you're doing
something for your own classes it's much easier - you've got a good
idea as to the classes experience as well as interest in whatever
event you're planning. A panel like this, not so much. I had no idea
on the audience size but since it would be mostly Stuy grads along
with a few Stuy students and a low cost or free event it meant that
the room would be filled with nimble minds. The challenge was that
those nimble minds would be all over the place with regards to tech
experience. I was guessing we'd have adult tech pros and hard core CS
people, students who were into CS just finding their way, adults
wanting to learn more but who had no background in either CS or AI,
and probably a few alumna who just wanted to show up for an alumni
event. Turns out I think I got the audience range right.

How to make a panel for that? You want to be able to do something of a
deep technical dive but you don't want to lose the non-techies. You
also want to spend time on all sorts of societal issues - talking AI
is a lot more than just tensor flow, neural nets, transformers, and
LLMs.

I reached out the my StuyCS family, my alumni network for four
specific individuals. Oh, if you're an AI person and part of the
family and wondering why I didn't ask you - remember - this was a live
NY event so all you Pittsburgh, Seattle, and California AI folks,
sorry - geography made that decision.

Alphabetically, first up was Ben - he was one of my technical
heavyweights. I was confident he could handle any technical curveballs
from the audience. He also has worked at both large companies and has
built startups so he could also give some management and
entrepreneurial context. Next, Doug - strong tech background but a lot of
experience as a technical manager. Been at a number of major and minor
companies from small to large. I figured he would anchor the
business/manager side.  Eugene was third - another technical anchor to
balance Ben but Eugene has more formal academic training and also
spent his entire career in a single major tech company. Finally,
Jamil who also brought startup and small/mid company experience but
has always been big on civic tech and equity related issues.

Of course, all four overlapped. I joked that Jamil was the conscience
of the panel but truthfully those societal issues were important to
all of us. Likewise, all have had some managerial experience etc.

From the limited feedback I got so far, I think the mix worked. We
started "defining" AI, modern AI, LLMs (in lay terms) etc. and then
shifted to issues like the use of other peoples data in training, bias
in AI, and of course, recommendations for the youngsters just getting
started. The audience Q and A got more deeply into these issues along
with future jobs issues and if it's even worth learning to code
anymore.

I won't recap all the specifics but a highlight to me was how the
panel painted the picture to show that while AI was new and shiny and
is opening new doors with both opportunities and challenges, at the
core, so many of the important issues are societal based, not
technical. Ben mentioning that in a startup the big cost drivers are still
things like personnel and that we're still very much in the same
startup/funding/scaling model just with new tech and Jamil and others
emphasizing that it's not that there are these new potential dangers
with bias, for instance with AI but rather that the bias is already
baked into our system and AI is the next frontier - a wake up call
that we can't just sprinkle some equity sugar on AI but rather have to
deal with the hard societal issues.

All in all, I think it was a terrific event.

At the end I had a chance to informally spend time with both panelists
and audience and it was great to see a number of old friends. Between
the panelists and audience, I had students from the class of '95 up to
some of my most recent graduates.

It was a fun first event to come out of my retirement hibernation. Not
sure whats next but this one was both educational and fun.



