---
title: They WILL use AI to come for teachers
date: 2023-06-28T07:00:25-04:00
tags:
- policy
categories:
- policy 
draft: false
--- 


With all the AI hubbub there's been a lot of talk about AI and
teaching. Will it enhance teaching? Replace teachers? Others? In this
vein, I saw this tweet by Pat Yongpradit of code.org yesterday
evening:

#+begin_export html
<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">I would share the nuance that teachers who don&#39;t use AI might be replaced by teachers who use AI, but honestly we need as many of you as possible. Our students need teachers to expand their effectiveness with AI, even if it just opens up more time for developing studentâ€¦ <a href="https://t.co/NzZGp9m57x">https://t.co/NzZGp9m57x</a></p>&mdash; Pat Yongpradit (@MrYongpradit) <a href="https://twitter.com/MrYongpradit/status/1673796564718964736?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">June 27, 2023</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>
#+end_export

I hope Pat's right but I'm pretty sure he's wrong. While Pat used to
be a teacher, I feel he's seeing this from an Ed Tech view as code.org
is in many ways an ed tech / lobbying organization.

As a general rule, if you want to see how tech can be used to enhance
education just look at the "elite" private schools. In my experience,
public school teachers are, in general, stronger and more innovative
than their counterparts in the private schools - they have to be since
the private schools have super small class sizes and the resources.

On the other hand, tech is most often used to cut costs at the public
schools or, when policy is set by republicans and neo-liberals, to
devalue and remove teaching.

Let's look at some pre-AI examples and you'll see why I think that AI
is likely going to be used the same way.

* Credit Recovery

This has been forced on the NYC public schools since the Bloomberg
Administration. Schools were and are under intense pressure to get and
keep graduation rates up and they couldn't just kick kids out like
Bloomberg's favored charted schools. Programs by which kids would sit
in front of computers and go through computer based training
modules. Instead of a teacher they'd have a lower paid aide in the
room or a teacher in charge of a far greater number of students. The
adult would trouble shoot the system but not teach.

This was cheaper and pushed kids through the system but it's not
education. Only recently are we starting to see some pushback on this
type of garbage but it's a prime example of tech that was meant to be
used as an "extra" instead being used to cut costs and remove those
pesky teachers

* Scripted lessons

This is not strictly tech but we've seen a push from ed "reformers"
towards scripted lessons. This is a favorite of private charter schools,
organizations like Teach For America, content and curriculum
providers, and yes code.org. There was even training where a teacher
had an earpiece during the lesson and an observer would correct the
teacher if they went off script.

Content providers love this because it streamlines things to a least
common denominator but it certainly isn't education. Charter schools
love this because they can hire untrained, unprepared "teachers" who
can just follow the scripts. Since the charters can just kick kids out
before standardized tests and they can drill and kill for test prep
they look good but again, it's garbage education.

Is it really a big step to go from bad scripted lessons to bad AI teachers?

* Cyber Charters

Online or cyber charters are another example. Online schools with
hundreds of kids per teacher. Lots of tech, little learning. Just look
them up.

* CS 50

If you've read my blog you know I'm not a fan of CS50 but the latest
news of them using AI TAs is another example of a level of non-teacher
hubris that could easily lead to a way to replace teachers.

Instead of addressing fundamental problems with CS50's design or
delivery, they're implementing AI TAs so that students can get more
help in the class. Adding an additional resource is, in general a good
thing but the real answer would be to look inwards and fix the
problems with the course and then also develop additional tools.

Do you really think that someones going to push for a version of
CS50 - probably focused on HS which is made up of videos from David
Malan, the charismatic front man, and computerized AI TAs. No teachers
necessary. There was a push for this during the MOOC explosion. It'll
happen again. If not with CS50 then with something else.

The AI TA also brings up tons of questions ranging from how the
feedback from the students will then feed into future classes to the
issue of students engaging with automatons rather than people and is
that, when it gets to a large scale, healthy? 

* Final thoughts

I do fundamentally agree with Pat in that AI will not be able to
replace teachers in terms of effective education which is why I don't
think we'll see teacher replacement in the "elite" private
schools. The rich will provide for their kids and foist the money
saving experiments on "other peoples kids."

Unless there are major changes in the way teaching and teachers are
perceived in this country there is no doubt in my mind that there will
be attempts to replace teachers with AI - it won't improve education
but it will enrich donors and reduce municipal budgets.

