---
title: There are no best practices - Proficiency Grading edition 
date: 2023-07-30T12:09:17-04:00
tags:
- teaching
categories:
- teaching
draft: false
--- 

I've said multiple times that I don't believe in "Best Practices." I
believe there are practices that can be strong when employed in
specific situations.

I was reminded of this when I saw a reddit thread yesterday where
teachers were sharing "best practices" that were forced on them by
their administrators or districts, usually due to "the research" that
just didn't work for them.

One in particular that stood out to me was Proficiency Grading, also
known as Standards Based Grading, Mastery Grading, Competency Based
Grading, Everybody gets A's,  and probably other monikers.

This stood out to me because from a philosophical point of view, I
agree with a good deal of what the Proficiency Grading crew are
selling. Instead of high stakes testing, students take a test or
assessment and then they can retake it again and again and as long as
they "master" the topics by the end of the term, they get "A" grade
level credit. Similarly, projects have loose deadlines and can be
resubmitted as needed.

I like the idea of removing letter grades and having everyone strive
to "know the material" and I love that it can reduce the pressure on
students. I really love removing high stakes exams.

I'm sure the research will say, if it doesn't already that it's the
true way and we should all be using it and if we aren't we're bad
teachers.

That's the usual M.O. of research to district to classroom. Had my
chairpeople not ignored central dictates early in my career, I would have been
a bad teacher because I didn't strictly follow the cooperative
learning model.

Later, I would have been bad because I didn't do everything with
discovery learning. Finally, I was bad because I actually used, shock,
direct instruction.

My observers knew better. That said, I
know plenty of other teachers who had to kowtow to Danielson or
wahtever the flavor du jour was in order to get their satisfactory
rating.

In fact, I'll share one brief story, I was chatting with my principal
at the time at Stuy and we were talking about a certain teacher that
both of us admire very much. This teacher taught both of our children
(4 in total) and we knew this person was the best. The principal told
me that they would have to be careful and never swing by this teachers
class when people from central were visiting since the educrats from
central would certainly frown on the way this teacher taught even
though we all knew otherwise.

Back to Proficiency Grading. In the reddit forum, a teacher was
complaining that this was being forced on them in their school and it
just didn't work. In practice, at that school, students would
basically intentionally bomb or not take the exams with the intent of
seeing what was on them and then taking "make ups" later. The class,
however, would move along. Frequently the students wouldn't follow up
in a timely matter and then didn't remember anything anyway. The whole
thing was a mess.

I heard similar things about new policies from Stuyvesant. Not mastery
grading but that if a student missed an exam, it would have to be
administered upon the students return - no penalties and no questions
asked.

Since then, there's been a subset of students who would intentionally
cut exams, find out the content from their friends, and then take the
makeup. The policy, as implemented was both lazily and poorly thought
out.


Now, again I'll say that there's a lot I like about Proficiency
Grading but the people who can use it whole hog are in very specific
circumstances. Maybe their in a college elective where students opt in
and are more mature. Maybe they have small class sizes so the extra
grading isn't a burden. Maybe the culture of their school plays well
with this particular reform. This is all great but when "the research"
comes down to the general public schools, it isn't pick and chose what
works. It's do it or else.

I implemented Proficiency Grading in my teacher ed program this last
cycle for the summer classes and it overall, I think was a benefit for
the students who approached the class the right way. That said, I know
a couple, well, let's say, cut corners. It really aggravated me but it
was better to do good by the majority. It'll eventually come clean to
those who didn't do it right. It did force me, unfortunately, to make
policy changes for the school year portion of the program.

This is to say that it wasn't a best practice in that circumstance. It
was a practice I wanted to employ but it turned out I couldn't without
modifications.

And that's the truth about all practices. As a teacher, you have to
build as robust a toolbox as you can but then, it should be up to you
to decide what tool to use, how to use it and when to use it. You'll
go with the subject, you'll see what your student's need and you'll
account for your own strengths. That way all your practices will be
best practices, at least for that instance.



