---
title: Cleaning out the office
date: 2023-08-13T15:40:45-04:00
tags:
- misc
categories:
- misc
draft: false
--- 

This morning, Devorah, Batya, and I drove up to Hunter to start to
clean out my office - the next step in officially becoming retired. I
wasn't really looking forward to it. When I moved from Stuy to Hunter
it was something of a rush so I basically boxed everything up that I
thought I wanted to keep and moved it to the new digs. So, three
decades worth of accumulated crap to deal with.

I had already gone through all the books trying hard to leave as many
as possible for other remaining faculty members and students but there
was still many books, personal computer equipment, puzzles and other
office decorations, the mini kitchen and more.

Of course, packing up brought many memories and artifacts.

Some of the highlights:

* Yearbooks

Stuy Yearbooks from 1995 - my first CS grads through 2025 and Stuy
Yearbooks are *big*. I got one every year - a nice keepsake and I also
had a rule - when a student asked me to sign their yearbook, I told
them I would but only if the signed mine. The problem? No way do I
have room in my Manhattan apartment for what would be a HUGE shelve of
books. I decided to consolodate. The only thing I cared about was what
the students wrote so I cut out the signature pages and now the whole
bundle is thinner than one yearbook. Looking over them what's cool is
just how many of those kids I'm still at least tangentially in touch
with today.

* Here's me in 1994:

{{< figure width="250"  src="/img/office/churl.jpg"  >}}


Okay, not really. This was given to me in the Spring of 1994 by one of
my math students. He doodled every day but it never prevented him from
being an active participant in class. Apparently other teachers gave
him a hard time. He said he appreciated it and gave me the sketch. His
family moved out of state that summer so I never saw him again but we
reconnected on Facebook years alter.

* A really old mousepad

{{< figure width="250"  src="/img/office/mousepad.jpg"  >}}

I haven't used a mousepad in decades but still have this one. It's a
picture of me and three of my students. They're all graduating seniors
int he picture and I had just taken them out for a congratulatory and
thank you lunch at one of the 6th street Indian restaurants. Dave's (one
of the students) father had the mousepads made for all of us. 

All four of those students have gone on to do great and interesting
things.

* A frustrated student

{{< figure width="250"  src="/img/office/line-drawing.jpg"  >}}

One day one of my students came in to my office rather frustrated and
this drawing was the result. An amazing student and an amazing person
who has also gone on to wonderful things.

* A breakthrough

{{< figure width="250"  src="/img/office/sched.jpg"  >}}

I had to commemorate this. For years, I worked to bring CS to Stuy. I
had some success and some failures. One of the fights was to allow
Stuy seniors to take our senior post AP CS electives instead of a
tech/shop class. There were already excemptions from tech/shop classes
for band, orchestra, and chorus but not for CS. There were and are
some strong tech/shop classes but some were, quite frankly, joke
classes. Meanwhile the advanced CS classes were regarded as high level
and rigorous so this was frustrating.

This changed in February 2010 when we finally got the administration
to allow the substitution. 

* Ticket printing

{{< figure width="250"  src="/img/office/ticket.jpg"  >}}

This wasn't a Stuy student memory but rather a personal one. At some
point during my Stuy career students started to invite me to Sing! and
other student productions. At one point I took notice of the
tickets. They were computer printed tickets and, as I suspected,
printed by the company Arcus Simplex Brown. This one was from 2012 but
I have one from a couple of years later as well.

As it turns out, and this is purely coincidental, I wrote the ticket
printing program as my first coding gig when I was a senior in HS and
through college. That was back in 1984. It was written in compiled
Basic and ran on a small computer running CP/M. It drove a custom line
printer onto ticket stock.

It was a great real life example of how you never know how long your
code will be running in the wild.

* Misc stuff

I also found a bunch of old gradesheets from back before I started
using Google Docs for records as well as a bunch of those letters from
MIT and other colleges you get when a student identifies you as being
influential.

I've been spending most of today trying to find places for all the
stuff and I hope I'll be done soon since I have at least one more car
load to go:

{{< figure width="250"  src="/img/office/remaining.jpg"  >}}


So that's a lot of stuff and a lot of memories. Just wanted to share.
