---
title: The CS-Ed podcast - teaching college without a PhD
date: 2024-03-09T09:20:03-04:00
tags:
- CS Ed
categories:
- CS Ed
draft: false
--- 

It's our third day in Charleston and we're stuck in our hotel. Stormy
rains and strong winds and a coastal flood alert telling everyone to
stay home. Our car is in the parking lot with water halfway up the
wheels.

We had tickets to go to the [[https://iaamuseum.org/][International African American Museum]] this
morning but got an email saying they won't be open until the afternoon
and that our tickets would automatically be refunded.

So while waiting and hoping that the rain subsides and the parking lot
drains I decided to listen to the latest episode of the [[https://csedpodcast.org/ ][CS-Ed podcast]]
hosted by Kristin Stephens-Martinez with guest Adam Blank. The title
was "What is in a Teaching Faculty Job Title?" but it was really about
teaching at the college level without a PhD. Adam, the guest, has been
teaching full time at the college level with "only" a Masters. I say
"only" because faculty without a PhD isn't the norm. I in no way mean to belittle his
degree or situation. I too "only" have a Masters in CS but, to be
honest, as soon as I joined Hunter College's faculty, I was the
strongest teacher in the department and likely one of the strongest in
the whole faculty. Maybe not the nicest, most popular, or charismatic
but the strongest. Yeah, that maybe sounds a bit arrogant and
egotistical but after my 26 years of self reflection and work to
improve at my craft at the high school leve, I can say I'm one of the
better teachers overall out there and K12 teachers, by and large are
much better teachers than college faculty.

Anyway, you should give the podcast a listen, here's a direct link to
the episode ([[https://csedpodcast.org/blog/s4e3_teaching_faculty_job_title/][link]]) and here are some of my thoughts.

*Disclaimer:* Some of the things said on the podcast were given as the
opinions of the host or the guest and at other times they were stating
things that others have said. I'm doing my best not to mix those
things up but apologize in advance if I do.

Both Kristin and Adam seem to believe that having a PhD doesn't make
you a better prepared teacher than just having a Masters. I
wholeheartedly agree.

I agree with the sentiment but Kristin pushed back saying that one
could get a PhD in CS Education.

I disagree with that push back on a number of fronts. First off,
there's still limited opportunities to do a PhD in CS Education,
second, education degrees, at least in the circles I've been exposed
to are sometimes not treated with the same respect as straight old
hardcore CS degrees and that brings us back to the whole point of the
podcast that a college instructor without a PhD shouldn't be a second
class citizen. Finally, there's the whole problem with education
education and education research.

Both Adam and Kristin felt that you can't understand the
research on education if you haven't done any research and this
understanding leads to one being a better teacher.

I guess it can, but much better is actually teaching and reflecting
and acting on those reflections.

In general, education research is held in very low regard. It's
rarely reproduced and hardly ever accounts for the myriad variables
that influence a class. An education researcher looks in from the
outside and says "oh, this seems to work." A teacher lives it and
either adapts or dies (1/3 of teachers leave the profession within 3 years).

To put it another way. I like classic movies. I watch many of
them. I've read analyses and taken classes. I've criticized
performances and directorial choices. None of this will make me a good
or even bettor actor, director, or cinematographer.

Even closer to home for me is that I was a competitive fencer. I
watched other people train and bout and even studied film. None of
that improved me. At best, it would inform me as to what to work on
when I took lessons, practiced and competed but only with that
practice and competition did I really improve.

Want to become a better teacher? Teach, get feedback, reflect, improve.

Something else that got me thinking along these lines was a comment
Kristin made asking if teachers really needed to be up on the latest
research or if it were enough for them to wait until that research
were distilled into a teaching handbook.

It got me thinking on how many times I was given a different "true
way" to teach based on the research.'

It also got me thinking about the typical teacher career
path. Teachers are most "up" on the research when the graduate from
their teacher education programs. When they're new. It's also when
they're at their worst as teachers. They quickly learn that their best
instructors were the ones that said "this is what the research says,
this is what your supervisor wants to see, and now we'll talk about
the reality of what you need in the classroom."

The teachers that get better might read the current research but more
likely they work on their craft, self reflect, and work with other,
frequently more experienced teachers. Teaching is very much a craft
and most of the master teachers you'll find won't be quoting the
research but developed in this way.

This brings me back to the subject of the podcast. Our entire higher
ed system has evolved into a hierarchical system focused on
research. Even if you're "teaching faculty" and don't have many or any
research obligations, there exists this caste system and there's
rarely anything in an institutions organizational structure to support
faculty members becoming better teachers. Sure, some faculty members
are great teachers and many work on their craft but it seems that
teacher development is normally something that an instructor is left
to do or not to do on their own.

With this system, there's absolutely no reason not to have a teaching
career path with the entry point being sufficient CS knowledge. I'd
prefer that plus some background in how to teach it but that's likely
a bridge to far for now.

Even had I not been an experienced teacher, the biggest difference
between me with my Masters in CS and the PhD's I worked with is that
they had super deep knowledge in some very narrow area of CS. This
meant that maybe I couldn't teach a small handful of super specialized
400 level electives but in practice I could teach many of them and as
my education and experience was more of a generalist, I could
generally teach a wider swath of classes at the entry to mid level
than many super specialized researchers.

The PhD is nothing special, or maybe it is special but no more so than
someone who dedicated an equivalent number of years towards being a
great teacher, a great software engineer, or a great a lot of other
things.

Hopefully one day higher education will realize this.
  
  

