---
title: CSTA 2024 day 2
date: 2024-07-17T23:01:02-04:00
tags:
- CS Education
categories:
- CS Education
draft: false
---

What, no day 1? Well, day one was all workshops followed by a keynote
and a reception. I generally don't do workshops and got in too late
for the keynote but I did hit the reception but not too much to write
about there.

This year the CSTA conference is in Las Vegas. I've never been to
Vegas and there's not really much of a draw here for me. I'm not into
gambling, the food, for a New Yorker is nothing special and while
there are a number of shows that are unique to Vegas, again, as a New
Yorker, it's not like I'm lacking for local entertainment
options. That said, there are some things I'll enjoy taking in while
I'm here - the spectacle of everything, the Mob museum, Hoover Dam,
and Red Rock Canyon in particular.

To be honest, though, I really don't get putting a teacher conference
here. Everything is *so* expensive. The rooms were reasonable (even with
the resort fee) but everything is nickle and dime. The room only comes
with 2 WIFI connections so if you're 2 teachers sharing a room and
each need a phone and computer on WIFI, that's $30 extra a day. Then
you've got food. A medium coffee in the morning is going to set you
back $7 or $8 and today lunch cost me around $25 for a mediocre
sandwich and a cannoli - around $10 more than I'd pay in NYC which is
not a cheap town.

So, I don't get the location but I still really enjoyed the opening
reception, had a blast today as well and am a big fan of the CSTA
conference.

To start out the day I sat in on John Dutton's session "Creating a
toolkit for all CS learners." I was hoping to avoid an AI talk since I
knew I'd get plenty of those later on but I really wasn't sure where
this session would lead. It turns out I didn't avoid an AI talk but
that was okay.

The first half of John's talk was on how he set up his class culture -
something that's both very important and also frequently neglected. He
spoke about empowering the class by asking them how they would like
this class to be different than others they've had - it reminded me of
my friend and former student Davin, who, whenever he starts a new
company spends time with the founding team discussing what they did
and didn't like about the culture of their past companies and then
uses their combined experiences to make a strong positive culture for
their new venture. John' talks about student "jobs" in the class and
more. I ran into John at lunch later and we chatted a bit. I felt that
our thoughts are pretty aligned on class culture being really
important but also confirmed my suspicion that he only had around 14
kids per class which affords him more opportunities to set a positive
culture than a teacher of say 34 per class in a crowded room. This is
not to take away anything from his work as he's aware of this
advantage and appreciates it.

John also talked about some CS teaching techniques. Well, they're not
really CS specific techniques but CS teachers frequently use them -
rubber duck debugging, asking classmates before asking the teacher and
a few other strategies. Then, the main event, a template to set up an
assignment that then used a script that used AI to take the data in
the form and create multiple, differentiated versions of the lesson.

To be honest, there wasn't a lot in this session for me given that I'm
not teaching right now but for a new CS teacher, I could see a lot of
value. I think I thought there would be more actual CS in the
presentation but that's neither here nor there. John shared [[https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1bUW03Qwvy2LvvUAIeH5j2n-K5jMxNk-M][this]] link
with materials which includes along with his lesson template, lists of
frameworks and other resources, and a whole lot more. If you're
relatively new to teaching CS I'd strongly recommend you click on the
link and check out everything provided.

Next up was a teacher certification talk given by three educators fro
Gwinnett County Georgia. The talk covered the state of things in
Georgia and what they've been doing. I learned that in Georgia, one
has to have certification (or rather, an endorsement) to teach
CS. This can be earned either by taking an exam or by earning an
endorsement through an approved program. This group from Gwinnett
designed a one year and also acquired funding to cover costs. I like a
lot of what they're trying to do. The Gwinnett team developed a one
year boot camp for current teachers and area trying to emphasize a
community model along with mentorship. Philosophically, at least from
the pedagogy and implementation side, their program sounds similar to
what I designed at Hunter in New York. My concern has to do with the
depth of CS knowledge they're covering. This isn't necessarily the
fault of the Gwinnett team though, it appears this is what Georgia's
requiring and if they require content far deeper than Georgia
requires, the state might not approve of their program and teachers
might not attend. Their program maxes out at APCS-P which to me, is
way to elementary for a certified High School CS teacher. Those
teachers need, in my opinion, at least a bit beyond APCS-A along with
a good deal of breadth.

It was interesting to hear about what was going on in another state
and while it sounds like Gwinnett County Schools are doing some pretty
good work within the framework and constraints their state provides, I
fear that by setting the CS bar so low, Georgia is shortchanging their
students.

After lunch, I attended John Chapin's session on "Machine Learning
Made (more) simple." I loved this session. John's material is all
[[http://bit.ly/CSTA-ML][here]]. John described and walked us through how he teachers linear
regression. His goal was to teach us (his students) how it works
rather than just use a library or black box toolkit. I'm 100% behind
this. Now, it is true that John's at a public magnet school with high
achieving students just like I was at Stuyvesant and what he
presented, out of the box, probably can't be  implemented in a typical
school but the approach and attitude certainly can and should.

John motivated the problem by asking what data would be helpful in
predicting home prices, he then had his class (us) work for a time in
groups to try to figure out relationships and even models to go from
the data to something to predict prices. He then stepped us through
unplugged hands on exercises that led us to and through gradient
descent. This in turn led to code and in the end, the class had both
written and understood a key machine learning technique.

Great session and I hope the attendees take this approach in some of
their CS classes. As I said, I don't think this specific assignment
will go over well as is with all populations but I think the approach
can. I've successfully done similar things both my AP classes and in
pre AP programming classes like when I cover writing a Caesar Cipher
decryption program. The difference is that in the Linear Regression
lesson the class is learning a specific machine learning technique
that requires a certain level of mathematical sophistication to really
"get" while in my case, we do a simpler problem that uses many similar
techniques but with simpler mathematics and simpler application. My
problem sets the stage for that ML lesson a couple of years later. I
also do something similar in my "who played Spiderman" unit.

Great session. I was concerned that all of the AI sessions - and there
are many - will all be, taking out policy sessions about using
existing tools and libraries and not result in students really
understand what's going on under the hood. This talk allayed that
concern.

I just hit the posters and exhibits for the last sessions and then
attended the closing keynote delivered by Gholdy Muhammid -
"Cultivating Genius and Joy in Education Through Culturally and
Historically Responsive Pedagogies." I thoroughly enjoyed the
talk. Muhammid is an engaging, entertaining and funny speaker. My
takeaway was that our teaching should be evaluated by the Joy in the
classroom and the pursuit of knowledge as opposed to just the standards
based evaluation currently used which just measures facts and only
facts. Note that I say "just the standards..." and not instead of
them. To her credit Ms. Muhammid noted that standards - the specifics,
the skills, the facts are important as well. This is critical. One of
my annoyances at a lot of the K12 CS movement is that there's
frequently only emphasis on the joy and they ignore the facts that at
the end of the day the teacher must know some, I don't know, actual CS
and that students must learn it as well.

That said, Ms. Muhammid's talk was really all about the type of
education reform we really need in our schools. I had a couple of
quibbles but it was a great talk. If CSTA releases a video, take the
time to watch it.

The day ended with Devorah, who played tourist by day, and I went for
drinks and some light dinner with the New York contingent at the
conference. A highlight was getting together with four students from
my CS certification program at Hunter including Marisa - a CSTA Equity
Fellow and incoming CSTA-NYC board member, Jessica and Josh - both CSTA-NYC
board members, and Victoria - the first person in New York State to
earn a Masters in CS Education from an approved certification program
and earn the associated license. So proud to have been privileged to
work with all four of them.


[[/img/csta-2024.jpg]]



