---
title: CSTA 2024 - the final day
date: 2024-07-21T19:51:07-04:00
tags:
- cs education
categories:
- cs education
draft: false
--- 

The conference ended this past Friday. After a couple of morning
sessions I started to play tourist which included spending more time
in the 100+ degree out doors. Fun stuff that I'll talk about later but
left me too drained Friday and Saturday evening to continue my write
ups.

First up was another AI session "Unlocking AI: Teaching Artificial
Intelligence in K12." Slides and other materials can be found
[[https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/121zotqh5_kr7jSP3HdUQue-vyT-goWznqFvjTbyvcWE/edit#slide=id.g2df995fa4b0_0_417][here]]. The speakers were Nora Burkhauser who gave the talk on "Machine
Learning for Kids" and Nick Yates. The talk focused on two
professional development opportunities they've developed to bring K12
teachers of all grade levels and all subjects up to speed on
Artificial Intelligence. Well really one PD opportunity split into two
part.

Part one, offered via remote sessions with interspersed assignments
followed by in person PD covered the basics. Basic definitions,
classic ML and AI, a typical AI pipeline. From where I sat, it looked
like this course provided a good overview for any teacher new to
AI. It didn't, in my opinion cover enough for a CS teacher in a HS
class to do a full AI unit but given time constraints of a typical PD,
it's a great start and looks like it provides plenty for the early
grade teachers and the non CS teachers while at least getting the CS
teachers on the road.

Part 2 goes over available AI curricula, touches on modern AI -
generative AI, neural nets etc., and also goes over applying AI. In
fact, they presented the same lesson, more or less, as was presented
in the "Machine Learning for Kids" talk I attended on Thursday. This
part 2 course certainly adds to the foundation for the early grade
teacher on non CS teacher, but still wouldn't be enough, in my opinion
for the HS teacher. I understand that the speakers can only do so
much - they can't offer one or more college or graduate level courses
in AI - they have to work within their state's professional
development system but we have to become vocal about the fact that so
long as our CS teachers are not coming in with strong content
knowledge, add on professional development isn't a solution, it's just
window dressing. Sure, right now it's frequently the best we can do
but more people have to start banging the drum that we *need* our CS
teachers to actually have a good amount of knowledge in, you know, CS.

Before moving on, I do want to say again that this was another strong
session and the speakers are doing great work, they're just trying to
do their best within the limitations of the system under which they
work.

After this AI talk I attended some lightening talks. The first was
given by a new teacher on  her just barely staying ahead of her
class. It was a nice talk but got me thinking that it might be useful
for CSTA to specifically set up an affinity meeting that combined
brand new CS teachers (particularly those with limited content
knowledge) and match them with groups of slightly more experienced
teachers - say those with 3 or 4 years experience. Teachers with
enough mileage so that they can provide encouragement and guidance to
the neophytes but not with so much experience that they've forgotten
the struggle.

Another lightening talk was about creating a social media presence. I
was interested in this because the speaker was going to talk about
making short form videos and I've spent the past decade+ in the world
of blogs. Unfortunately, the talk was really more about how to tweak
your already existing video content to maximize viewers. Valuable if
you've already got a video presence but not the info I was hoping for.

I didn't attend the last keynote so that was it for me but that's not
it for my SIGCSE post. Next up, the exhibitors, Las Vegas and final
thoughts on the conference.
