---
title: Enemy Of The Good
date: 2024-09-25T11:14:27-04:00
tags:
- misc
categories:
- misc 
draft: false
--- 

I usually listen to podcasts on my morning run. For the past couple of
weeks I've been listening to [[https://99percentinvisible.org/][99% Invisible]]'s series on [[https://99percentinvisible.org/club/][The Power
Broker]], Robert Caro's incredible biography of Robert Moses. Arguably
the best book on New York City not to mention urban planning and
politics.  Amazing book. I read it a few years ago, well, actually
listened to it at the same time as Natan - our own personal father son
book club. We've done it with a few tomes  - [[https://www.robertcaro.org/the-power-broker][The Power Broker]], [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don_Quixote][Don
Quixote]], and most recently [[https://www.nytimes.com/2020/09/16/books/review/wagnerism-alex-ross.html][Wagnerism]]. 

I highly recommend both the book and the podcast series but I'm not
going to talk about either really today. As part of the series, each
episode includes an interview with a guest. One guest was Michael
Schur, co-creator of [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parks_and_Recreation][Parks and Rec]]. During the podcast, he told a
story about how, when working on Parks and Rec, they interviewed a
city bureaucrat or civil servant. He wanted to rebuild a small local
park. He had all sorts of plans to return the park to its original
glory including magnificent columns. Schur noted that since we live in
a democracy, he couldn't just start building but rather all sorts of
constituents had to weigh in. One group wanted less grass, another
objected to the ornateness of the columns and so it went on and on. By
the time the park was actually finished, it was a pale imitation of
the original plans. Sure, it was a new, rebuilt park, but the
 plans had been gutted, scaled back and otherwise twisted.

In spite of this, when asked, the civil servant said he was happy with
the results. Sure, he wanted his plans but he also knew how government
worked and in the end, he as happy that there was some progress.

I see the same thing happen time and time again. Traffic calming
efforts that would improve safety, air quality, and quality of life in
general for many New Yorkers shot down because a small group of people
(usually rich white ones) insist that the city can't remove the free
public parking in front of their buildings. I won't even get started
on the housing crisis in the city. If following our cited civil
servant's point of view, the people pushing the positive changes in
the city should be happy with their baby step successes. 

I've always had difficulty with this point of view. 

I'm not saying it has to be "go big or go home" but I've always tried
to do it right rather than do it enough to check the checkbox.

I remember when New York City was creating AFSE (The Academy for
Software Engineering). I was involved for a while until the Department
of Ed froze me out. The DOE insisted that the goal of the school was to
create industry ready software engineers right out of high school
based on what I had built at Stuy. I said "great, but to do that you
need to have an academic screen to get in"  knowing that you can't get
to industry ready if the kids are coming in multiple years behind,
particularly in math. I also said that they could go without a screen
but they'd have to adjust their expectations (as well as messaging)
since without the screen and with students coming in at all levels,
the best they would be able to do is give some exposure to computer
science and if they did it right, prepare them for college CS or a
boot camp after high school.

I said they could go either way but I was pushing for the entrance
screen. Not anything like the Stuy test, but something to make sure
the kids entered with enough of a math background so that the school
could accomplish its goals. I really believed with a modest math
screen and the right resources, the school could be something special.

At the end of the day, I lost that one. The DOE froze me out. The
created an unscreened school (again, I'm not saying this in and of
itself was bad) but they maintained the messaging that the kids would
get that top level software engineering preparation.

Of course the students didn't. The school was fine as a generic school
but in terms of Software Engineering and CS Prep, looking back, I'd
actually say that there were public NYC schools that already existed
that were doing as well or arguably better and I'm not talking about
test schools like Stuy here.

In discussing this was friends, I was commonly told "don't let the
perfect be the enemy of the good." I get it but it's something that
I've long struggled with.

At the end of the day, I think I was right about AFSE for the students
that went there. If the school was honest about what it was, I think
it could have served its kids better. Alternatively, if it added a
nominal screen it could have fulfilled its stated objective.

On the other hand, I was also wrong. The schools existence along with
the Public Relations push and industry hype, all under the Bloomberg
administration probably helped pave the way for Bill de Blasio's
CSforAll initiative in New York City.

So, was I right or was I wrong? I don't know. Without AFSE we might
not have had CSforAll so I was most likely wrong but part of me still
believes that they could have done the school right and at the same
time still built the hype.

I've also been similarly on both CSforAll and CS teacher prep
programs. My position has always been that we need knowledgeable CS
teachers in CS classes and that knowledgeable means actually knowing a
fair amount of CS. Of course this would mean a long term ramp up and
funding to actually pay to prepare the teachers. The majority trend
and view is quite different - start teaching CS now even if teachers
don't really know what they're doing and we might work things out at
some later point.

I'm not going to address the people who feel that short form PD is
enough to make a strong high school CS teacher other than to say
they're flat out wrong.

My view is wrong in that the ramp up would take years - probably
decades. That means that potentially another generation of kids would
be denied any CS education. On top of that, the amount of time needed
would be far longer than typical government office terms and who knows
if initiatives would survive from one administration to another.

On the other hand, doing it quick and dirty can also be wrong. I've
seen both teachers and schools who believe that once they have someone
in an APCS-P class - regardless of that teacher's ability to actually
teach CS - as long as they have the seal of approval of having gone
through some rudimentary code.org style training, it's good enough and
the school is set for life.

This is also a problem.

An even worse problem is when a school is teaching CS badly and
either turning off students or teaching them things that are just
wrong resulting in kids getting turned off later on. I've seen this as
well.

So, I'm still muddled on this. I find it very frustrating when I see
CS education at the school, district, city, state, or national level
moving in a direction that I think is, not wrong, but not optimal even
though I try to console myself with the fact that the movement is
positive in a lot of ways.

I also remind myself of something Pete Seeger frequently said,
attributing it to Rene Dubos - "think globally, act locally." I take
great pride in the results I've gotten when I have been able to do
projects my way with my team - Hunter, Stuyvesant, and an assortment
of others. That reminds me of something that a very smart friend once
told me years ago when the K12 CS movement was just starting. He
predicted that "there will be small pockets of excellence" - referring
to places such as Stuy but the mainstream will be mediocre at best. I
think the mainstream overall is doing a fair deal better than mediocre
but I think his point of view was pretty prescient. 

In any case, I do wear my naysayer hat as a badge of honor. I think
the movement needs people like me to try to keep the mainstream
honest. 
