---
title: Evolving As A Teacher
date: 2024-11-22T15:18:28-04:00
tags:
- misc
categories:
- misc
draft: false
--- 

Over the past couple of months I've had a number of interactions with
former students. A fourth of July celebration with some of my first
students, a bunch of dinners dinners and a couple of alumni events.

It got me thinking that while I was the same person and same teacher
for all of them, I was also a different person and teacher.

We all evolve over time.

One particular conversation made me think. I was talking
to one of my earlier but not earliest grads. Someone who graduated
within my first decade my career - a number of years that based on
my scale would place me as moving out form advanced beginner and
into intermediate level as a teacher. Devorah and I were getting
dinner with this former student, who I now consider a friend, and his
partner. He was talking about the stress levels and impersonally and
large schools like Stuyvesant and in fact in many large public
schools. Something I agreed with. He also spoke about his college
choice. He was and is a really smart guy and had strong grades but he
didn't want to go to a school like CMU or MIT since he thought they
would be the same type of big machine hyper competitive education
complex that some people perceived Stuy to be and so opted for another
top CS school that he felt would be more chill.

All of this got me thinking. At that stage of my career, I was still
enamored with my students all getting in to top name schools. I was
patting myself on the back when my students hyper achieved and I was
designing experiences for the top of the class.

Now, I didn't know it, but I would evolve. A few year later, I would
refocus on all students designing my intro course and pushing the city
for CS Education for everyone. I also became more aware on the college
front. Whereas I don't think I advised this student particularly well,
if at all back when he was a senior but a few years later, I would
probably have tried to get some small liberal arts schools with great
CS onto his radar. I learned that you can do just as well at a Tufts
as a CMU or similarly a Stony Brook or a Hunter college, where I'd
later end up teaching. I learned it was about fit not about ranking. 

Later, as I got older, I'd also evolve in terms of my perception of
students needs. Back then, I don't think I did a particularly good job
curating my class or my office suite for culture. Sure, we had a fun
quirky tech culture going on but I'm talking about a comfort zone for
students. Later in my career, I heard back from a number of former
students who thanked me for making my classroom or my office suite a
"safe space" for them. I didn't think I explicitly did anything
special other than try to be a decent human being but I think it was
also part of my evolution as a teacher. Something I didn't know to pay
attention to in the early years but fortunately something changed at
some point so I did better as I gained more experience.

All this is to say that on some levels I was always the same teacher
but we do change for better or worse. It makes sense. When I started I
was only a few years older than my students. In fact, I had a couple
at Seward who were piratically my age. I could be viewed as
practically a peer or an older brother. By the end, I was older than
my students parents.

The funny thing is that while looking back I can clearly see how I
changed as an educator, for years I had my students evaluate me
anonymously and my ratings decade in and decade out were pretty
consistent. At the same time, my results, however you measure them,
also remained pretty much the same as did, at least to my perception,
my rapport with students and former students.

All of this is neither here nor there but it's something to think
about and I encourage long term educators to look at their own careers
and see how they've evolved.






