---
title: Who's the Expert Thought Leader
date: 2023-08-10T11:26:48-04:00
tags:
- education
categories:
- education
draft: false
--- 

Last weekend I attended the AI X Education Conference - an online
conference on, well, AI in education. There were some talks about AI
and generative AI in particular but really the split was that Saturday
was focused on college education and Sunday on K12.

I only caught a bit of each day but fortunately, the sessions were
recorded. Two in particular or more specifically two specific
speakers, one in a K12 STEM education session and another in a
humanities education session caught my attention. One for good, one
for bad.

All of the speakers at conferences like these are anointed with
authority. By being included and given a speaking platform they
automatically become "experts" and "thought leaders." This has been
true throughout the decades I've been involved in CS Ed. Sometimes the
"expert" does indeed the deserve the platform. Far too often, they
don't.

Let's dive in.

One speaker, let's call him speaker A, spoke about AI. Repeatedly
stated how we should be using it (I agree, with this one point) but
also how AI tutors and teachers *will* be better than human
counterparts. Speaker A also segued into how discovery learning is a
must and anyone who doesn't approach their classes from that point of
view isn't doing it right. He went on but it was all in a similar
vein.

The other speaker, speaker B started by saying he was going to share
some of the things he (or maybe he said he and his colleagues, I
forget) were doing and seemed to be having some success. He shared how
he used generative AI to build scenarios for student activities, for
example. Speaker B encouraged the audience to try similar but never
made authoritative statements of "this is the one true way."

Both of these speakers, by virtue of the conference organizers have
been anointed as "thought leaders" and "experts." Are they?

Maybe.

Speaker B may or may not be an expert but in my opinion, he did it
right. Here's what we tried. Here's what happens. Our situations might
differ so your mileage might vary but think about giving it a go.

This was just a report on his experiences but this is what, in my
opinion, good ed research is like - we tried something, here's what
happened but there are a million variables we can never account for so
take it all with a grain of salt.

This is also how I approach preparing teachers - give them the tools
but emphasize there is no single true way. Speaker A talked of how you
*have* to teach but he was wrong. Based on circumstance, students,
environment, and yes, that often omitted aspect - teacher strengths
and preferences you make the best possible choice. You might want to
have a discover lesson because it would work with your students and
you love to do it but your class might be too big or maybe the class
length isn't long enough or there could be a myriad of other reasons
why another approach might be better in that particular instance.

Speaking of speaker A, let's revisit him. You already know that I
wasn't impressed but I decided to dig a little deeper. Best I can
determine he teaches at a private school with an enrollment of 225,
resources and small classes. It looks to have a high performing
population.

*Of course discovery learning works* in that environment. Most things
are easy if you have a dozen kids who are performing at or above grade
level. Will that translate to the underfunded overcrowded public
school? Well, I think you know the answer.

So, we have speaker A - anointed but in my opinion, not worthy. If one
teaches at a rich private school does that mean they can't be an
expert or real thought leader? Of course not. But the ones that are
the real experts know that their school - whatever it is, is not the
same as the next teachers so, unlike the Sith, they don't talk in
absolutes. Many teachers in many types of schools - public, private,
religious, urban, and rural have shared great ideas in education but
the good ones understand it's not a best practice, just a practice that
might have been best for them at a certain place and time.

I've learned a lot from many, *many* great people in the CS Ed space
but I also can't tell you how many times I've sat in on a session and
just had to shake my head knowing that the "expert" didn't really know
what they were talking about. Many times we do great but often, I
think we can do better. 

Anyway, that's my education rant for the day.

I wasn't able to hit all the sessions but overall what I did see was
enjoyable and worthwhile. It looks like you can request access if you
want to watch the recordings of the conference [[https://www.aixeducation.com/][here]].

Enjoy.




