---
title: Repl.it, Coding Rooms and Twitter - the loss of free services
date: 2023-11-16T14:08:47-04:00
tags:
- tools
categories:
- tools
draft: false
--- 

A number of months ago, the K12 CS Ed community was abuzz. It seems
that Coding Rooms - an online collaboration and coding platform was
closing their free teacher tier. I was going to write about it then
but didn't get to it.

Some time later, I noticed some complaints about teacher
throttling. Again, meant to write but it didn't happen;

The other day though, there was another disturbance in the force as
teachers started commiserating about Repl.it closing down the
teacher teams part of their platform. This was accompanied with
complaints about the nerfing of their free tier which apparently has
been ongoing. I thought "wait, didn't this happen already?" but
remembered that the earlier one was Coding Rooms.

Now, I never really used Coding Rooms much - when they launched I was
mid semester and had already settled in on my tool set. It looked like
they had some cool things and at the time, they were talking the
"supporting teachers" game but it never made sense for me to switch
over to them for my platform.

Twitter? Musk pretty much made it worthless months ago. I'll still pop
on at times but mostly what's I'm seeing there is extremist
propaganda.

Repl.it is another story. I've played with it on and off for years and
used it with my online classes. Rather, I promoted it as a recommended
coding platform for my online classes. I never used their teams for
education features. Since my classes and I lived through the nerfing
of the free repl phase and it wasn't all that bad for us, I guess I
haven't really be affected by these changes but at least it's a
product I've been using and know fairly well.

On the one hand, this sucks for teachers - particularly the fact that
Repl.it just announced the change mid semester. On the other hand,
what do you expect for nothing? Rubber Biscuit?

Coding Rooms, Twitter, and Repl.it are all companies working to build
market share and make money (okay, maybe not Twitter :-) ). They don't
owe anything to any of us for free and there was never any guarantee
that free would remain free. If you've been looking we've seen the
free tier for web services disappear now for years. It used to be that
every API had a free tier. Now you only get a small number of starter
credits. Heroku and other hosting sites also used to have free tiers
or made it ridiculously easy to get credits. In that sense, the
overall writing has been on the wall.

On the other hand, GitHub maintains free services. Free though as in
we're not paying money. All our code I'm sure is being used to train
their AI. Now, for GitHub, I'm not saying they're better or worse. I
used to be a big GitHub supporter - GitHub for Education in particular
but now all my friends their are gone so I'm feeling like more of a
GitLab guy these days.

Anyway, I also don't blame teachers. Teachers are in an impossible
position. They need tools for their kids to work with. Some have been
forced to use Chromebooks so no local installations. Others are
hampered by internal IT policies, although IT people are frequently
misunderstood and demonized, and of course budgets, particularly in
public schools are always an issue.

Still, as teachers, we can and probably should do better. We
frequently use things because they're convenient rather than
right. Most of the chatter I saw about Repl.it was in the assorted CS
Ed Facebook groups. Facebook is a closed private platform. Zuck can
make some policy decision and it all goes away yet we use it as a
community platform because it's convenient. On the other hand, a bit
of the discourse was on the APCS ListServ. I think that listserv might
be run by the College Board so that's not good, but at least, in
theory with a listserv, you've got everyone's email address and can
migrate to other platforms.

I'd love to see more of what we do on open source and open platforms.
This blog is hosted on GitHub but it's all plain text and built with
open source tools. I've got a copy of it all locally and can migrate
it or self host it easily. Speaking of blogs, I miss the old days
where there were more CS Ed bloggers and more discourse on said
blogs. Yes it was more distributed but it was open. Nowadays I rarely
see new CS Ed blog posts in my feed which is a shame.

In any event I don't see anything changing - over the last few years,
when people I speak to talk about using a new communication platform,
they default to Discord. Personally, I've never been a fan of it but
in any event, it's another closed silo, so is Slack for that matter.

I lament, but I also know Usenet news is never coming back.

So, that's where we are. Teachers will find another free something and
use that for a while, then it will go away. Those that have the
resources will use either free or open source tools or in some cases
commercial ones but it's doubtful that our schools will ever get the
funding they need so that this is no longer an issue.
