---
title: How Much CS Do Teacher Candidates Know 
date: 2023-04-25T07:41:59-04:00
tags:
- policy
- csed
categories:
- policy
draft: false
--- 

I was talking to the CS chair at Hunter the other day - he's been a
good friend since I joined Hunter and is also teaching the programming
course in my teacher ed program this summer. William also taught the
same class last year.

Due to a shift - we're moving our advanced certificate program from a
Summer->Fall->Spring schedule to a more traditional
Fall->Spring->Fall->Spring one, this summer, we're running very small
sections of our classes specifically for the 4 masters students who
would be left in the lurch otherwise.

I was telling William that this summer should be pretty easy - 4
students, give or take and most of them already know the material.

What?

They know the material?

How did we end up with that and what's the point of them taking the
classes.

It's a great example of New York State's left hand not knowing what
its right hand is doing or worse, the state not really understanding
CS Education. I wouldn't be surprised in either case.

When NY created its CS license they decided that programs could *not*
assume any pre-existing CS background. This was very different for
other subject areas where you typically need a couple of dozen
undergrad credits in the field. Why? I'm just conjecturing but one
reason would be the existing belief that "if they know too much CS
there's no way they'll go into teaching." Another would be that they
thought many current teachers - the ones currently teaching CS without
any background would earn this new additional cert and we had to meet
them where the were.

Now, I'm all for a low bar for entry but when you combine this
position with the state's SOCE (statement of continued eligibility)
things make less sense.

On the one hand, the state created a system where teachers could
become re-certified without too much stress but did nothing to make it
affordable - even at public rates, all the credits will cost around
$10,000. Combine that with the SOCE which, by filling out a simple
form allows a teacher to teach CS without demonstrating any CS
knowledge for another 10 years.

On the masters program side - the pipeline for new teachers, the fear
that nobody will teach CS if they know CS is nonsense. I wrote about
it [[https://cestlaz.github.io/posts/draft-will-we-lose-cs-teachers-to-industry/][here]]. Sure, most CS majors will want to go into the tech industry
but just like mathematicians and scientists, some will want to become
teachers now that there is a path.

That brings us to why our summer program will be populated with
students who already know the material.

Even though the state required that our program assume no prior
knowledge, aspiring teachers don't know what education programs are
like. They just know (or currently believe) that they want to become
teachers. If they want to become CS teachers, there's a very high
likelihood that they already know some CS. Just like other
subjects. Could you imagine someone wanting to become a biology
teacher if they had zero knowledge of biology? How about math or any
other field. If someone wants to become a subject area teacher then
it's safe to say that:

 1. They want to teach.
 2. They know at least a little about the subject area in which they
    want to teach.

This has proven to be true, albeit with a small sample size. Every one
of my Masters program applicants came in with some CS or programming
background and the vast majority of them either had strong industry
experience or were a CS major. One I think was a CS minor and another,
just a hobbyist. Most of them came in with more "core" CS than our or
any other program in the state offers.

This led us to where we are. Normally, this makes for a nice mix. The
certificate students (that is, working teachers becoming re-certified)
bring the teaching experience while the masters candidates bring the
new energy and CS background.

Now, with the SOCE. I expect the number of teachers seeking the new
cert to plummet and Hunter and other providers will focus recruiting
more new, aspiring teachers. Ultimately, this will lead to more course
offerings as the population comes in with a stronger background but
that will take time.

In the meantime, due to state requirements and local resources, we'll
have these small classes this summer with candidates who already know
most of the material.

In the Fall, we'll start our next cohort of advanced certificate
students - even with the SOCE I'm hopeful that we'll get a decent
cohort since we have scholarship money, along with a new handful of
masters candidates. Once again, the mix should be mutually
supportive. It will certainly be better overall to be on a normal
Fall/Spring rotation but beyond that we'll see where things go.







