---
title: How Early Apcs
date: 2023-04-18T08:35:32-04:00
tags:
- CS
- teaching
categories:
- csed
draft: false
--- 

A couple of weeks ago I was catching up with Cai - one of my many
former students now living in the Bay Area. Cai was back in NY to
spend time in his company [[https://ironcladapp.com/][Ironclad]]'s NY office. It was great to catch
up. We went over to a local restaurant and I heard a "hey Z!!" from
behund me. It was Rodda, younger member of the family. He mentioned
that he was at Ramp along with a bunch of other StuyCS folk and that I
came up in conversation the other day. Yet another former student Zach
was there, he's one of their investors. I love the Stuy CS family.

Anyway, Rodda mentioned that he started a trend of sophomores taking
Stuy's APCS class, wich is the old APCS-AB - both programming (college
CS1) and data structures (college CS2). I left Stuy before Rodda
graduated so I don't know if it started a trend but I hope it
didn't. It got me thinking back on how CS classes at Stuy evolved and
what was appropriate for students and when.

TL;DR - too many people are in too much of a rush and we end up with
kids taking classes before they're ready. Better to slow down - do no
harm. Enrichment is frequently better than acceleration.

Long version:

Back when I started at Stuy, there were no rules for CS - pretty much
anyone could take APCS whenever it fit into their schedules. Prior to
my teaching, there was one section each year along with a couple of
other "programming" classes now and then, some were out and out jokes
and others were decent CS0 classes. Once I started, demand jumped -
not because I was so great - I barely had a rep at that point but
probably because I made people aware that APCS existed and also they
knew that a CS guy was teaching it, not a math guy. Also, creating the
post APCS electives also pushed demand.

Still, the class was mostly populated by seniors and juniors. In those
first few years, though, there were a few sophomores. Freshmen both
didn't know about the offerings prior to coming in nor did they have
the flexibility in their schedules to even try to enroll.

Now, at Stuy, we taught and teach  AP classes like legit college classes - that
is, we worked to cover the same material at the same level of depth
and we mapped one semester to one semester - very different from the
current APCS-A model where it's a semester college class mapped over a
full year or sometimes longer.

The seniors had no trouble. Neither did the juniors. The sophomores,
however, were a mixed bag. Some did fine, in fact great. They got it
no problem. Many of those sophomores are thriving in tech today. Some
were able to do okay - they made it through the class and in fact got
fours and fives on the AP exam but they didn't really "get it" - they
weren't ready. They could follow the patterns and mimic responses but
they were not there yet. Others, just flat out weren't ready. It
reminded me of some of the math kids I taught at Stuy - they came in
super accelerated - some were ready for it - those were the math team
aces. Others were the high achieving student in the weak school so
they were pushed to the more advanced class. They were able to pass
the regents exams but they didn't really "get" the math. Invariably,
these kids hit a wall.

Overall my program was doing fine but I didn't feel good about the
sophomores. Some made it but deep down I knew that for the majority of
them, if they waited one year more - just one year more of maturity
and academic maturity, they would have gotten so much more out of the
class and perhaps would have gone further. That's when I focused the
APCS class on juniors - old enough to thrive but early enough so they
could take our advanced electives. Of course, I let seniors in as well
if they were unable to take APCS with us in the junior year but it
became a much more junior dominant class.

For the sophomores, I ultimately designed our intro course which let
them vet CS and get their feet wet and then take our ACPS-AB when they
were ready. Sure, some were ready earlier, but what's the rush? A
student could still take all our offerings before they graduated so
what did acceleration give other than a greater chance of failure.

That possibility of failure - turning a kid off just because it's too
early has been a guiding principle for me over the years and that's
why I always go enrichment over acceleration. As I said before, what's
the rush.

Too often we try to push kids too fast. Another place I saw this was
with "physics first" at Stuy. The idea was that there was a feeling
that not enough students were taking advanced physics classes so if
you gave our "best" science students (based on standardized measures)
physics in 9th grade then more would take the advanced classes. This
sounded good but the truth is, most were not really ready for
physics. They passed the regents but that was because they could
recognize and fill in the right formulas. At the end of the day, it
didn't help get more students taking more advanced physics and truth
be told, these kids would probably have a better appreciation of
physics if they took it later, parallel with some of the math that
complements the subject.

To be honest, when I hear teachers boast about doing college level
work with early high schoolers or middle school kids, I'm
skeptical. Sure, there are special cases, like Rodda who are ready,
can do it, and will thrive but most aren't ready. In those cases, I
wonder if the teacher boasting is doing it more for the students or
themselves. It also makes me chuckle when i hear things like APCS-P is
a college level course and then at the same time hear it's being
offered to ninth graders who are crushing it.

It would be great if we took a step back and slowed down. Teach kids
what's appropriate when it's appropriate and not worry about having
to say "my kids did calculus in the third grade."



