---
title: Israel, Palestine, and antisemitism
date: 2023-11-02T16:17:14-04:00
tags:
- misc
categories:
- misc
draft: false
--- 

I was born and bred in NYC. Went to public school and worked mostly in
the public sector. I've lived my life among one of the most diverse
populations in the world. As a Jew, I've also only lived in a
communities pn which Jews, though a minority, are accepted and
frequently assimilated. Throughout my life I've rarely faced
antisemitism personally and feel that even in the greater USA, public occurrences of
antisemitism have been relatively infrequent.

Not recently.

Since the Hamas atrocities of October 7, to my view, antisemitism has
reared its ugly head big time. Not merely the blatant calls for my
people's extermination from neo-nazis and the like but more subtle
antisemitism cached in the call for Palestinian liberation.

Before you get too upset, let me be clear - Israel has a right wing
problem, a Netenyahu problem and for years, pro Palestinian voices on
settlements have been ignored. Many Jews, including myself have been
vocal for a while against some current and past Israeli policies but
these calls aren't antisemitism. I'm talking about the "pro
Palestinian" talking points and rallies.

I'll go into more details but the TL;DR is pretty simple. If there's a
rally and it only talks about an immediate cease fire or other Israeli
acquiescence without calling for the release of the hostages and the
end of Hamas' terrorist actions then that rally is antisemetic.

When the slogans and signs read "from the river to the sea," that's
antisemitism - it's echoing the age old call to wipe the Jews from the
face of the earth.

Even when some people "try" to be balanced and say that Israel has a
right to defend itself, they follow up with a call for Israel to
immediately stop any retaliatory or defensive action knowing that
history has shown that this only empowers terrorists like Hamas. The
talking heads never actual give a reasonable course of action for
Israel other than lay down your arms which reminds me of the line
originally attributed to Golda Meir "If the Arabs put down their
weapons today, there would be no more violence. If the Jews put down
there weapons today, there would be no more Israel."

It's also worth looking at recent history. Multiple times,
Palestinians were offered a 2 state solution going back to the late
forties when modern Israel began. The Arab nations thought it better
to decline and try to destroy the Jews. This history repeated time and
again most notably at the turn of the century when Arafat said no to a
deal that would have given the Palestinians 95% of what they wanted.

But let's get back to the antisemitism.

Beyond what I've already said you have to consider why nobody calls
out the Arab nations on their treatment of Palestinians (or even Hamas
who would rather build tunnels and rockets to kill Jews rather than
build infrastructure to support Palestinians). From 1947 to 1967, Arab
nations controlled Gaza and the West Bank. Where was the outcry for
Palestinian Independence?

Some people say that the Palestinians elected Hamas. Others note that
there hasn't been a free vote in Gaza since 2006. Okay, but then why
aren't there protests and rallies about that?

It seems that if you're Arab (or I guess European) you can abuse and
kill Palestinians and it's okay, it's only an issue if you're Jewish.

This is all to say that from my point of view, a HUGE amount of the
pro Palestine posturing is thinly veiled antisemitism - no more, no
less. If people truly cared about Palestine and a two state solution
(as I do) they'd call out Hamas, work to rid Palestine of them, work
to establish self rule and at the same time call out Israel's current
leadership and policies.

People have to be more aware of this and the inherent dangers but I
fear ignorance and hate are more the order of the day.



