---
title: New York - where actual teacher preparation in optional.
date: 2024-02-01T14:03:17-04:00
tags:
- CS Education
categories:
- CS Education
draft: false
--- 

This morning, I read Arthur Goldstein's latest [[https://arthurgoldstein.substack.com/p/anybody-can-teach-newcomers-says][blog post]]. Arthur, is a
relatively recently retired NYC public school teacher, a UFT
(United Federation of Teachers) chapter leader, and a frequent critic
of Michael Mulgrew, the current and long term UFT president.

I'm a union guy through and through but I also, like Arthur, believe
that UFT's leadership is neither pro-teacher nor pro-student but
rather pro-themselves. It's a rather sad state of affairs.

Today, Arther shared Mulgrew's latest "accomplishment." He, along with
the city and state have relaxed the requirements for bilingual and ENL
(English as a new language) certifications. This is in response to the
recent massive influx of newcomers.

The deal has two parts. The first makes all the sense in the world. If
a teacher holds the credentials for multiple certifications - one for
bilingual and one not, they will be able to activate the bilingual
cert with no penalty - that is they won't lose salary, tenure,
seniority or anything else. This should always have been the case and
it should in fact he true, or at least partially true for any
certification area. Maybe not the tenure thing but even in that case,
there should be some modified rule to encourage teachers to switch to
their most needed certification and not be penalized for doing so.

The second part is the problematic one. They're easing the
requirements for the bilingual certification. Now, instead of
completing the coursework and taking an standardized assessment, you
only have to do one or the other. That is, take a standardized test, a
single instance platform on which success certainly doesn't indicate a
teacher is qualified or take a handful  of courses.

Arthur was lamenting over the exam, but given the number of education
programs in NY where you just show up and earn an "A" or even for some
you barely have to show up, this is basically just a rubber stamp for
bilingual teachers.

Here's the language from the UFT's release on the program:

#+begin_quote
Certified teachers and pupil personnel services professionals (i.e.,
social workers, school counselors and psychologists) can now complete
either the examination requirement or the enrollment and education
requirements, instead of both. That means candidates can pass the
Bilingual Education Assessment and/or the Content Specialty Test in
ESOL, if available, in lieu of completing coursework and matriculating
in a registered program leading to a bilingual education extension
and/or an ENL certificate.
#+end_quote

This struck me as awfully similar to the CS SOCE (Statement of
Continued Eligibility). In New York State, even though we now have
computer science certification, they created the SOCE which basically
said that as long as you taught a single CS class in the last couple
of years, if you fill out a form, you'll be essentially certified to
teach any CS in your school for the next 10 years.

Both of these initiatives attempt to address the lack of qualified
teachers. Bilingual for the influx of new non native English speakers
and CS for the new field of study that the city and state have been
pushing.

Both of these initiatives will, and in the Case of CS have resulted in
students being served by unqualified teachers both now and for the
next decade and such actions should be criminal.

True, some teachers thrown into a CS classroom know their stuff and
some are working diligently to learn but many aren't there and to many
are making no serious move to get there.

In each of my first to cohorts for Hunter's advanced certificate
program, I had well over 100 applicants. These were supposed to be the
most prepared of the city's CS teachers - all culled through the
CS4All program and most had completed multiple years of New York's CS
training - much of which was provided by organizations like Code.org.

My CS prerequisites were pretty simple - a code sample in a text based
language that showed some basics. A program with a function that
returned the smallest value in an array or list of numbers would have
covered all the requirements and then some. That's also a typical
early assignment in a CS0 class.

Each year, only a very small number of applicants - something like
under 10, maybe under 15, could complete this, another handful were able
to, with the help of self study resources like the Runestone academy's
Python or Java texts got up to speed. Each of the first two cohorts
had a little over 20 students including a handful of masters
candidates. All of the masters candidates came in with more than the
required CS background.

Now, for those applicants who learned what they needed and were
accepted, my hat was off to them, they worked hard and did what they
had to do. They were great members of the cohort.

On the other hand, of the hundreds who never followed up, many had no
idea what I meant by "in a text based language like Python, Java, or
Javascript," or similar parts of the application - and many of them
had been teaching CS for multiple years and attending DOE training for
multiple years.

Now, New York State comes along and says that they can all teach CS
for 10 more years, no questions asked.

The kids will suffer.

How can the state get away with this? They don't care. Neither do the
teacher's Unions (and again, I'm a big Union guy) - their current
teachers can do whatever they want and all is good. The students don't
know how they're being harmed and overall, parents are none the
wiser. I've mentioned that a number of my Hunter undergrads came in
having scored a 3, 4, or frequently 5 on APCS-Principals and while
some had a good background, way more than should have would have been
better off not taking anything. All these kids were super bright and
motivated. It wasn't there fault they were sold a bill of goods.

Back to the bilingual issue - again, the DOE, NYSED and UFT can get
away with it because on the surface, it looks good - we can teach our
newcomers but they're the ones who will suffer. And of course, they're
a population with no voice.

Should be criminal.

So, that's my rant for the day. I promise, more CS teaching content
and positive posts to come.

