---
title: Leaving a golden age for CS self-learners
date: 2023-09-20T12:33:22-04:00
tags:
- learningcs
categories:
- learningcs
draft: false
--- 

In many ways we might be entering a golden age for learning CS. After
years of hard work by many many people, more and more schools are
offering CS, states are making standards (mixed opinions on these),
and in some cases, requirements are being implemented.

In one interesting way, though, for the self-learner I'm noticing
that we're leaving what I think was a golden age. You might say, "but
Mike, there are online videos and tutorials for almost everything
these days" and that's true but on the other hand, many types of
resources that were common around 10 years ago are no longer being
made available.

When I started to learn about computers back in the 80s there were few
paths for the self learner. If you were able to afford one you could
get a personal computer but compilers, if available were crazy
expensive and there weren't online communities and resources like
there are now.

A good example of this was databases. You couldn't play with SQL
unless you were on a job somewhere that had an SQL database serer or
maybe in a class at the college level. For the most part, if you
wanted to learn about a relational database, you'd have to "acquire" a
program like dBase to run locally. Not SQL but it was relational.

This changed a bit as PCs became more prevalent and cheaper. A
big player in these changes was Borland. They actually made affordable
tools. Turbo Pascal, C++, Prolog - all affordable to even a college
aged kid. Add to that Paradox, a relational database, Quattro, a
spreadsheet, Sprint their word processor, and other tools and a self
learner could at least have a pretty robust set of CS tools on an
affordable IBM-PC clone.

Things really got better when the Internet started to hit and Linux
became available. Free tools galore. SQL became available with MySQL
and Postgresql (my preference), all the programming languages and
tools you could ever hope for and so much was open source and free to
use. We also saw the rise of public code repositories like
Sourceforge which preceded today's GitHub and GitLab.

Of course, all of these things are available today so why do I say
we're at the end of a Golden Age? What's going away?

Free tiers for APIs and services. 

As the Web grew, aspiring techies had to move from writing a program
that ran on their personal computer to something that ran on a
server - that communicated with other servers and clients running web
browsers and custom front ends. For the self learner, this wasn't a
problem because there were tons of services that had free tiers in
their membership models or at least free starter credits that had a
generous lifespan.

If you needed to host a project - no problem, spin up a Heroku
instance. On free it wouldn't be great and you wouldn't want it for a
commercial service but it was fine for a small personal project or
just to learn. It was gold for a kid looking to host a project to show
off to potential hiring officers.

Want to go more bare metal - use the Digital Ocean starter credits -
enough for a full year on a low end virtual server. Again, nothing
powerful enough for a business but great for a student or just to
learn.

Need to work with with sending and receiving sms messages and cell
phones? Twillio had a great free tier - it was set up so that you
could learn and play as much as you wanted but it was restricted in a
way to make it impractical to exploit for a real business. Perfect for
learners without costing the company.

Need a nosql database - try the MongoDB free tier or just download the
whole thing onto that Digital Ocean droplet. 

There was pretty much no service, technology or API that you couldn't
work with for free on your personal computer or using a free tier
online.

Now that's all changing.

The first thing that got me thinking about this was the current AI
boom. No longer can you just develop locally. Want to do that new
fangled AI stuff at home? Good luck young kid starting out at getting
all that affordable GPU power. Good luck any individual. So since you
can't do it locally, you've got to find a service. Okay, there are
some free things out there but more and more the free tiers are drying
up. I'm seeing more starter credit scenarios but with relative short
half lives. that's a problem unless you can sign up and do what you
want to do before the credits expire. That's though if you're bouncing
from thing to thing and can't necessarily say "okay, these two weeks
will be all on this service." I get it that some of the entry tier
rates are very reasonable, at least for someone like me who's at the
end of my career but I think about the kid I was teaching at Hunter or
maybe the recent Hunter College graduate who hasn't started in tech
yet and is really counting the pennies.

We've also seen more restrictions on non AI online services. Both in
terms of price and complexity (I'm looking at you OAuth2). 

So yeah, some things these days are great for the self-learner but I'm
really missing those days from about 10 years ago before the web got
too "civilized."
