---
title: A model district for introducing CS education
date: 2023-05-26T06:49:38-04:00
tags:
- teaching
categories:
- teaching
draft: false
--- 

One of the highlights of this week has been finally [[https://cestlaz.github.io/post/certified-teacher-meetup/][getting together]]
with a large number of the teachers in my certification
program. Another was finally being able to once again attend a CSTA-NY
meeting as they've almost always conflicted with my teaching schedule
over the past couple of years.

The reason I scheduled my meetup back to back with the CSTA-NY meetup
was because of another highlight. Five of my Advanced Certificate
teachers are from the Dryden and Groton school districts, a little
east and northeast of Cayuga lake near Ithaca. The three Dryden
teachers were able to come for a visit so I scheduled my meetup so
that the Dryden folk could attend both and meet a whole bunch of new
CS teachers.

How this all happened should be a model for other districts across the
state.

A couple of years ago I got a cold email from someone in the Dryden
school district. They were asking about my advanced certificate
program. Having seen that New York state recently published its
Computer Science standards and had recently created a certification,
they knew that they would need to deal with the subject area in some
way or shape. They knew that finding a new computer science teacher
would be very difficult as none of the colleges offering teacher
certification programs in the area offered CS Ed. They also knew that
even if they found a new teacher and were able to hire them, that
would be one lone teacher and a new one at that being solely
responsible for the districts direction in computer science.

The could also do what many others have done - send a couple of
teachers for short form code.org or similar training. Well, you all
know my feelings on that.

So, what did they decide to do?

They saw that I offered an advanced cert program - a way to recertify
some of their current teachers. They were working on a writing an NFS
grant proposal to support CS education and were thinking about
including a funding request to send some of their teachers to such a
program.

It would have to be my program since it was and still is the only such
program running in the state. We spoke, they liked what I was selling
program wise and so worked to include it in their grant. I tried to
lend whatever support I could.

In the mean time, I also had to make sure my program remained remote
accessible - something I was already fighting for since it can be very
difficult for a working teacher, particularly one in a transportation
desert to get to Hunter after a long day. I felt we had a
responsibility to those local but distant teachers as well as the rest
of the teachers across the state. My administration agreed and we
remained remote.

So, by Spring 2022, Dryden, who had teamed up with neighboring Groton
were awarded the grant and we got five teachers into my cert
program. All five have been great and it's been really healthy to add
a handful of non NYC teachers to our already solid mix of current K12
teachers and aspiring masters students.

This past fall, Devorah and I drove up to their region for a small
Fall vacation and while there I was able to visit the Dryden High
School and spend time with both the teachers and the
administration. As part of their grant, the three Dryden teachers were
able to come down to the city. The two Groton teachers couldn't attend
due to scheduling conflicts. The three came down on Wednesday and were
able to attend our [[https://cestlaz.github.io/post/certified-teacher-meetup/][meetup]] and connect with other CS
teachers. Thursday, I partnered each with a local CS teacher who was
doing something similar. One of the Dryden teachers was interested in
tech/robotics to go with the CS, another also an art teacher and the
third a generalist.

This was followed by the CSTA-NY meetup which inspired them to see
about either getting involved in their closest CSTA chapter or if not,
forming a new one. This was cool to hear.

Now, this morning, they'll be visiting my old haunts at Stuyvesant to
observe a couple more classes and meet a few more teachers before
trying to beat the holiday traffic on their way back north.

Moving forward, Dryden and Groton now have a combined 5 qualified,
certified CS teachers and can now design programs and opportunities
that best suit their student's needs as opposed to just copying the
curriculum du jour. I'd be delighted if they include me in that
process but if they do or don't, Dryden and Groton are in great shape
for CS education moving forward.

Other districts should follow their lead.





