---
title: Should we use MongoDB in High School
date: 2024-05-01T11:14:59-04:00
tags:
- CS education
categories:
- CS education
draft: false
--- 

Should we use MongoDB in High School? That's the question. Usually
when I give a post such a title, I already have an opinion - it'll be
a yes or no and if it's yes, I'll have a plan.

Not this time. My gut tells me there's a place for it but I'm not sure
where. Besides, that's not what this post is really about.

At one point during SIGCSE 2023, I stopped by the MongoDB booth. Had a
couple of great conversations with the people there. I wasn't looking
for how I might use it in my classes - I knew I'd be retiring soon but
I did want to convey how much I liked the product and how supportive
they've been towards some of my efforts both K12 and while I was at
Hunter, I mean I still have more MongoDB shirts than pretty much any
other type of swag shirt from when they donated so many for some high
school hackathons I've run.

This year, at SIGCSE, I reconnected with my new MongoDB friends from
2023 and we started asking if there were a place for MongoDB in a
typical High School. Clearly there was at Stuy but I covered MongoDB
there in a senior elective after the kids had already finished a CS0
class as well as a college CS1 and CS2.

Now MongoDB is much more advanced than when I started using it but
even back then there was a lot to like. It stored documents
essentially in dictionaries which made things much simpler than
SQL. You also formed dictionaries to form queries which might have
been trickier to "get' than SQL with things like "SELECT NAME from
PEOPLE where AGE=30" or something like that but much easier to debug
and automate since one deals with a data structure to do it in MongoDB
as opposed to string manipulation for old school SQL. It was also
helped from the fact that most student projects didn't benefit from
the relational SQL model. There was also an open source server you
could install and self host.  Nowadays MongoDB is much more capable
for example it's [[https://www.mongodb.com/resources/basics/databases/data-lake-vs-data-warehouse-vs-database][data lake]] features.

I don't think MongoDB is *the* tool to universally use in High School but
my gut tells me there's a place for it.

The cool thing to me is that we're now exploring this. Me, a
few teachers I've gathered, and some new friends at MongoDB. The
interesting thing is how it came about. Many of the K12 company based
initiatives were the result of the company (or college) deciding that
they wanted to do something in the K12 space. This frequently comes
with a certain level of hubris that they can do it better. Not always,
but frequently. The small companies and startups then work to generate
interest and ultimately market share. The big boys are more frequently
anointed since so few K12 CS educators are currently armed to really
evaluate what they're seeing.

This was different. Nothing coming from the top. What started as a
serindipidous conversation between someone on the education team at
Mongo and me, an old education curmudgeon. We both asked "does it make
sense?" We didn't know the answer so we're exploring.

Tomorrow morning I'll be going to MongoDB World Local in New York and
hope to meet a couple more people on the MongoDB team. In the next few
weeks, I'll be talking to some teachers who also hope to explore the
MongoDB in high school question. After that, maybe not until the Fall
if people are away for the summer, we'll get together and start to get
to work.

Either we'll see that MongoDB probably doesn't make sense in high
school or we'll figure out where and how. It'll be a fun process and
if we do figure it out, you can bet it'll make more sense than any of
the typical initiatives that come from above.



