---
title: Observing History
date: 2024-01-23T12:17:15-04:00
tags:
- CSEd
categories:
- CSEd
draft: false
---

When I was a kid, CS in K12 wasn't a thing. Personal Computers were
just becoming available. I remember pilgrimages to the basement Polk
Hobby shop to play. I don't even remember what those computers were
but soon, names like Apple, TRS-80 and Commodore PET were
appearing. Throughout my schooling, CS wasn't a thing until High
School and even there it was a couple of random classes because
somehow Stuyvesant had an IBM-1130 - a punch card driven machine and a
couple of math teachers taught simple programming electives.

In my senior year, 1984, APCS came in but it wasn't wide spread and it
was a single random class for a handful of students taught primarily
by math teachers. When I went into teaching after college and a short
stint at Goldman, not much has changed.

What I'm getting at is that some of us - teachers of, um, let's say,
an age have really gotten to witness history. We've been able to live
through the emergence of a new study area in K12.

That doesn't happen too often.

At some levels I always realized this but in many ways I probably just
taught day to day without thinking about it.

We've witnessed something that didn't even exist to starting to answer
questions like what should be taught? At what grade or grades?
Separate or as an add on to other subject areas? Who will teach it?
What must they know? What's the point? Will this help solve the
achievement gap? And on and on.

Since America consists of fifty different education systems, if not
more, we've seen lots of different approaches - certification
questions, standards, or lack thereof, what counts as CS? CS vs Tech
Ed, requirements or electives?

In some ways it's amazing how far things have come but also amazing
how much further there is to go.

Personally, I'm in some ways amazed but also lament so many missed
opportunities. In many ways CS Education in K12 has gone the way of
other education. That's a shame. Just like in Math, prior to NCLB
Math teachers had to *know* math. Now. many take "math for math
teachers" and can barely pass local assessments. CS Ed in far too many
places seems to be going that route. CS Certification programs that
barely contain any real CS or even worse, just certifying based on
vendor driven professional development.

I'm also lamenting the frequency of the checkbox approach - Oh we do
that in this existing class - check, or we have this one course on the
books for a few self selecting students - check.

But then, there's also some good going on out there. The teachers that
applied to my cert program - even the ones that weren't accepted were
all seeking out real CS knowledge and a network of CS teachers -
that's inspiring and of course the fact that we're discussing CS
availability and equity related issues means we've gotten things off
the ground and there are people paying attention, at least to that
side of things.

All this, is of course, ongoing. It's going to be years, probably
decades before K12 CS is settled for better or worse. Some people will
want to be very involved - I'd like to think that my involvement has
been for the better, and some would rather just teach but pay
attention. We're living through the evolution of a field of study and
really not many generations of teachers really get to be able to do
that.



