---
title: Real world projects or made up ones?
date: 2024-02-29T12:48:54-04:00
tags:
- projects
- CS
categories:
- CS Education
draft: false
--- 

There was a discussion to day on a the Facebook CS Educators group
about project based learning. This was initiated based on the College
Board's desire to more more project work in some classes including
APCS-A.

Most, actually I think all of the  educators on the forum agreed that
students creating projects are a good idea but the bone of contention
was over real world projects vs what I'll call practice projects.

The thought is that a real world project would be a program that they
might do if they were at a business - a complete web app for instance
or a game, soup to nuts. A made up project might be implementing a
sort or a data structure.

In the discussion some felt that all projects should be real world
arguing that students will be more engaged. Others felt that while real
world projects should be a goal, made up projects were more
appropriate at times - like how you'll practice etudes on a musical
instrument when developing your chops rather than only ever working on
a piece.

I don't agree with the stance that real world projects are more
engaging. Let's take games - something always paraded out as real
world and engaging. Sure, to kids who like computer gaming. Not so
much for everyone else. Personally, I'm not huge on gaming and neither
were many of my students. That said, enough were so that it made sense
to explore game projects in some classes and to certainly allow them
on appropriate open ended projects.

Let's contrast that to made up projects. I've done assorted graphics
projects and many had zero real world ramifications but many (not
all) students found them super engaging. I've also frequently done a
computer Caesar Cipher decoder. Many students found it very
engaging. It wasn't real world but it gave a level appropriate
foreshadowing of a lot to come - proto-AI, proto-math, proto-stats.

Not real world but very engaging and I'd argue, more valuable than
forcing a real world project that was less appropriate for what we
were learning.

Besides, let's look at some real, real world projects. Here are some
projects that software engineers I know have worked on:


 - make a round button that launches an already built feature of our
   platform.
 - I changed my mind, make it more of a rectangle with rounded
   courners.
 - Move that UI component down 3 pixels and over 5.
 - Change all the calls in our code base to function f so that it no
   longer passes null as the final parameter so that it matches the
   new API spec.
 - Write a function to check a string to make sure it conforms to our
   input specification.

The list goes on. The truth is more real world programmers work on
small bits of a larger system. They're working in teams (something I
think our students have to learn about, but not exclusively) on large
systems. Very rarely does someone in the real world go from concept to
completion all by themselves, although I think CS programs would
better serve their students if they did teach this manner of "software
architecting."

So, really, real world can be fine but it's not the be all and end
all.

Some might mean "uses real world data" for real world and this can
certainly work. I frequently assign data based projects - find a data
source, collect it, clean it, and do something with it. If the
students can find data they like that can be super motivating but
again, it's not a be all and end all. I've had students go nuts over
writing a Mandelbrot set explorer - no data there and not real world
but super exciting for some.

I haven't even really addressed group work or solo but I think this
post is long enough as it is.

The truth is, authentic assignments come in all shapes and sizes and
can be inspired by all sorts of things. Real world, whatever that
means can be great but are not always appropriate. In K12, most
schools top out with CS0 (APCS-P or similar) or CS1 (APCS-A or
similar) not much in the real world is CS0 level - real world data,
real world ideas, yes but not real, real world. Made up assignments
can be as good or better and freed from the constraints of real world
can be much more appropriate for a students development and just as if
not more motivating.


