---
title: SIGCSE 2024 - Papers, Experience Reports, and Lightening Talks
date: 2024-04-01T19:36:48-04:00
tags:
- SIGCSE
categories:
- SIGCSE
draft: false
---



Last up we have paper sessions, which include experience reports and
lightening talks.

Probably won't write as much on this - I'm a little SIGCSE posted out.

One interesting note was a semi-recurring theme of "the hidden
curriculum." I say semi-recurring because while it appeared in three
sessions I attended - two experience reports and one lightening talk,
each time, the speakers were referring to a different "hidden
curriculum."

The first time was a talk from UCSD describing a projects course. It
was similar to many projects based courses - students are shepherded
through a large project, but in this class, students worked
exclusively on large existing open source projects. The hidden
curriculum consisted of all those real world tools and techniques not
covered in a typical CS sequence - testing, code maangement, tech
integration, navigating a code base and more.

The course sounds great. If given a single choice, I'm not sure if
it's better for students to work on a large original project or to
learn how to work in an existing one as both skill sets are valuable
and important but do like what they described as going on at UCSD. 

The second time the hidden curriculum came up was in a lightening
talk from instructors at the Milwaukee School of Engineering. What was
interesting was that they were talking about something altogether
different from what UCSD considered their hidden curriculum. In tnis
case they were talking about things like study skills, stress
management, homework strategies, registration and advisement, time
management, and life after graduation. While I certainly appreciate
everything about the software engineering skills form the UCSD talk,
the skills talked about here are arguably more fundamental and they're
skills that many students, particularly those from lower income
households have never had the opportunity to develop. This took me
back to our first keynote when the speaker mentioned that he while he
got great support from his family as the first one going to college,
he got very little help. His family supported him and wanted him to
succeed but as nobody else from the family had ever gone to college,
they didn't have much to offer in terms of concrete help in
navigating this new world. At the school. the instructors taught their
hidden curriculum through extra curricular sessions during common free
times (providing free food to draw in the students). 

The third hidden curriculum was a talk titled "From Degree to
Developer..." In this case the hidden curriculum as interview prep
both in terms of the soft skills for interviewing and also the
technical interview skills - how to pass those LeetCode problems. The
solution in this case was like the first talk - create a course that
was essentially an algorithms course with interview style
implementations along with the soft skills.

What struck me here is that we've got three different institutions all
resorting to something outside of their school's major requirements to
address a real student need (the two courses that were created were
free electives). Something's wrong here and unless it's addressed
we'll see the gap between the haves and the have nots continue to
expand since well to do students at elite institutions are best able
to learn these hidden curricula on their own.

Personally, I've found that if you're strategic you can add a fair
amount of the software engineering practices to core CS classes
without too much hassle - certainly if you tweak the content a bit -
do we really need every single one of those data structures and do we
have to dive so deep into proof and theory? Maybe we should realize
that our programs are still set up for 100% percent of our grads to go
on to get their PhDs where the reality is that the majority want to
take tech skills to industry. I'm betting programs could easily
accommodate most of the hidden curricula with some sensible
re-evaluation of requirements and everyone would be better for it.

One other session that I want to mention before I wrap up was one on
"Creative labs in CS1" at Georgia Tech. This was interesting. In this course, they
added a handful of what they considered "fun" projects. The concepts
would not be tested on exams. These projects would not be in Python,
which I guess is the core language for the CS1 class. The first
project might be an HTML/CSS web site. The second, maybe adding some
JS. To be honest, I didn't get this at first but then the speakers
explained that at Georgia Tech, CS1 is almost entirely made up of
non-majors. I'm still not sold on their plan here but I think I get
what they were trying for. What got me was the fact that this is a
real problem and not just for Georgia Tech. We're seeing more and more
schools requiring students to essentially pre-declare in CS before
they're even admitted to the school. Kids without sufficient
opportunities, as a result, are being locked out of the field. I know
we've got a booming enrollment problem but we've got to do better.

So, that's it for the sessions. I think I'll do one more SIGCSE post
as a general wrap up and talk about our Portland adventures. Then
it'll be back to my usual curmudgeonly rantings.


