---
title: SIGCSE 2024 - keynotes
date: 2024-03-24T10:29:30-04:00
tags:
- SIGCSE
categories:
- SIGCSE
draft: false
--- 

I wrote about the first keynote in my [[/post/sigcse-2024-1/][day 1 post]]. Today I'll talk
about two more. There were two additional keynotes during luncheons
but I didn't attend those.

First up was Jane Plane titled "Find Your Drop and Add to the River." Strong
keynote but it spoke to me in a very different way than the fist
keynote. The first keynote was maybe the first talk I've heard by
someone thought of as an education expert who actually spoke the
measured truth rather than eduspeak propaganda. This keynote resonated
as I've recently been thinking a lot about the drops I've either
contributed or failed to contribute to the CS Education cause.

"Drop by drop a river is made" was the lead quote. It's a translation
of an Afghan proverb. Plane's plea was for us all to find our drops to
contribute and when dealing with CS Educations major issues -
diversity, equity, and inclusion - it's going to take all of us adding
our drops and while any one action might seem insignificant, they add
up over time.

The talk started with Plane's journey. How she had the opportunity to
and then actually built the first Masters in CS program in Africa and
then later did built similar programs in Afghanistan. She also spoke
of the drops she added at Maryland and now in Wisconsin. One might say
that not everyone will have those opportunities but the truth is, most
people, if they did have them, probably wouldn't have taken them nor
accomplished as much. Regardless, even more mundane sounding drops can
big time contribute to the river.

In the first keynote, Todd Zakrajsek told of how he almost dropped out
of college but the right words at the right time from one single
professor changed the course of his life. Without those words, none of
his drops would have been added.

In the micro-teaching session, one instructor mimed an interaction he
had with a student. Before "class" he asked what the student planned
to do after college. She said, she wasn't sure. The instructor
encouraged her to come to office hours to discuss. The "student" was
at my table and said afterwards that the interaction was real and
ultimately it what led to her becoming a CS educator. That's a lot
more drops.

The other day I noticed a comment on LinkedIn by my friend Leigh Ann
DeLyser. Leigh Ann commented about the number of "multipliers" at
SIGCSE. Made me think of the fact that teachers in general are
tremendous multipliers. One word can send a child in one direction or
another and the drops we add can turn into streams or more. As a high
school teacher, I was charged with 150 or so students each
semester. If even a small number, say, become teachers themselves, or
go into tech and as a result of my classes pay more attention to DEI,
well, that's one drop that's turned into a steady flow. We might not
all be creating new programs in other countries but every teacher has
an opportunity to be a tremendous influencer. We just don't get credit
on the internet.

The other keynote I attended was given by Rachel Rose of ILM. The talk
started as a journey talk - from early interests through college and
ultimately to ILM. One point was when Rose emphasized that
she collaborated more in her CS classes than in her other
classes. This was interesting. It makes sense - particularly in
project based courses but flies in the face of the stereotypes. It's
also interesting in light of the ongoing tensions in schools between
collaboration, individual assessment, and academic honesty.

The second part of the talk was a showcase and inside look into the
technologies Rose's team developed at ILM for use in productions like
"The Mandalorean", "Solo," and others.

Next up was a talk about the Academy Software Foundation. How the
movie industry banded together to form a foundation and how each major
studio contributed open source platforms. Now the industry can use
standards and tools like materialx, opencolorio, and openfx. You can
chcek out ASFW [[https://www.aswf.io/][here]]. Looks really cool and having all the major
players rally around the virtues of open source is really cool. My
only issue with them is that their logo has an open comment with no
close comment and that just bothers me.

The final theme, which appeared throughout the talk was the industry's
work to increase diversity. A major point Rose made was that
youngsters have no idea as to what they can do within the movie
industry. Neither do they understand the educational path from school
to Hollywood be it in tech, the arts, or some hybrid of both. 

All three keynotes were strong. All conveyed worthwhile messages and
all were delivered in an entertaining way.

Good job SIGCSE2024!!!!

Still to come - BOFS, Panels, and Paper sessions.
