---
title: I'm a fan of teachers but not of teacher appreciation week
date: 2023-05-08T15:48:50-04:00
tags:
- misc
categories:
- misc
draft: false
---

It's once again teacher appreciation week. That's a week late in the
semester ostensibly celebrating our teachers. Over the years there
have been a few highlight moments for me during these teacher
appreciation weeks but overall, I can't say I've been a fan of the
"event."

Why not?

Because it's usually made up, superficial, and frequently patronizing.

Some stores offer discounts. Staples and Office Depot offering
essentially discounts on supplies for the classroom that teachers
shouldn't have to purchase in the first place.

Other places offer a free beverage or discounts on whatever their
products were but hey, if teachers were paid reasonably to begin with
they wouldn't need these discounts. 

Basically, my problem is that teachers are not generally appreciated
year round and they should be. Sure, it's nice to have a "special day"
or week but when you spend all year dumping on, underpaying, and
overworking teachers it rings hollow. 

On the flip side, there have been some teacher appreciation week highlights.

The biggest highlight, although, to be honest, it's just as special
when it happens at random times over the years has been when a former
student whom I haven't been in contact with reaches out with a random
thank you. It's usually not public and usually a short email or
similar but that's pretty cool and pretty special. Sometimes the fact
that it's teacher appreciation week spurs a student to reconnect so
that's cool. 

The other was one particular appreciation day gift. At Stuy, over the
years, the principal and/or department chairs have frequently given
small gifts to their staffs. They're usually small and frequently
useful like my math department umbrella but there was one year when
the gift stood out.

I forget the year but Jinx Perullo was the principal. Instead of the
usual small gift, she got business cards for every staff member. We
all had email accounts at stuy.edu thanks to me and my student
sysadmins so every card had the teachers name, department, and
stuy.edu email. I had an office and a phone but I don't know what was
on the cards in terms of phone numbers for other teachers.

I thought it was a great little gift. As the profession has been under
attack since before I joined and teachers were always treated as less
than professional this was more than a gift. It was a sign of
respect. Most teachers didn't really have many uses for business cards
but it made an impact.

So, that's my take on teacher appreciation week. I'd be fine without
the week, better to treat teachers better year round.
