---
title: It's teacher appreciation week again
date: 2024-05-08T11:34:06-04:00
tags:
- teaching
categories:
- teaching
draft: false
--- 

It's teacher appreciation week again so I thought I'd show some
appreciation.

In the past, I've specifically [[https://cestlaz.github.io/posts/2012-05-09-my-favorite-year-teacher/][written]] about some of the teachers who
were particularly influential on me growing up. I've also [[https://cestlaz.github.io/post/teacher-appreciation-week/][written]] about
how I'm not a huge fan of teacher appreciation week as a whole. Today,
I wanted to talk about colleagues who deserve more appreciation from
their students and schools than they might be getting. Now, this isn't
to say that they're not getting the love but I wanted to add my two
cents to make sure.

First, my partners in crime from my days at Stuy. People like JonAlf
Dyrland-Weaver, Sam Konstantinovich, and Topher Mykolyk. Not only are
they great teachers but whenever I've had a project that benefited
either kids or other teachers, they've gone above and beyond. Those
three were instrumental in helping build and run my teacher
certification program at Hunter college. They were way underpaid, way
overworked, and in some (but not) cases, underappreciated by some of
the students. Most of the students in the program were great but the
third cohort, if I'm to be honest, had a few, let's say, challenging
participants and I'll always appreciated my big three for working
through and providing the best experience possible for the majority of
students.

Now, I also had a number of other great teacher colleagues through the
years and I do appreciate them but I wanted to single out DW, Mr K,
and Topher (why am I blanking on what the kids call him now?).

The other teachers I wanted to single out today are the teachers who
went through my certification program. We had 20 in the first cohort,
20 more int he second, then 60 in the third. The program continues on
under the expert guidance of my friend and former student Edgar Troudt
but I'm focusing on the three cohorts I worked with.

Yes, all my advanced cert teachers received scholerships to cover
tuition but they *all* decided to give up a summer and spend all day
every day in July with me and my motley crew to learn more CS and how
to teach it. They then spent the following school year taking courses
as well as recording their classes, remote observing their fellow CS
teachers and in general supporting each other as they all worked to be
the best teachers and the best CS teachers they could become. They
worked hard and learned a lot. The teachers who participated who came
in with less CS content experience spent countless out of class hours
with classmates, TAs and instructors to develop their skills.

As it turned out, with the State's SOCE, it turns out that some, maybe
even most of these teachers didn't and might not need the actual
certification but they all took it upon themselves to work on
improving their content knowledge and their refining their pedagogical
techniques so they could be the best version of themselves for their
students. It's also worth noting that they all elected to take on my
program which I feel is pretty rigorous. At the time, we were the only
game in town but if they decided to enroll in a certification program
now, they'd have the option of rigorous programs, like mine and a
couple of others or by taking one of the less rigorous programs that
have since been approved by the state which barely cover any legit CS.

I don't know if their students really know or appreciate that these
teachers have really gone above and beyond for them and I'm sure will
continue to do so.

So, hat's off to them. A bunch of great teachers super worthy of
appreciation. Not just this week but throughout the year.






