---
title: Teachers want to teach AI but how will we teach the teachers?
date: 2024-03-05T09:58:42-04:00
tags:
- ed policy
- AI
categories:
- AI 
draft: false
---

Saw [[https://www.edweek.org/technology/how-young-is-too-young-to-teach-students-about-ai-survey-reveals-differing-opinions/2024/02][this]] earlier as posted on Linkedin by Pat Yongpradit of
code.org. According to the article, nine out of ten educators think
that students should be taught how AI works prior to graduating from
high school. How it works, not just how to use it. This is a good
thing. Sure, opinions vary as to when to teach it - elementary, high
school, or across the board but still, a good thing.

It did make me think though about a few things.

First, in a way this is really just saying "kids should learn computer
science." This too is a good thing but the bad thing is that a lot of
people talking about learning about AI don't get this.

AI isn't some new magic mystically appearing. It's algorithms applied
on data on computers with a user interface. Sounds like CS to me, more
specifically a subset of CS. Sure the data sets are HUGE and the
algorithms, more complex than the bubble sort but at a technical
level, it's a next step.

AI applications can do some really impressive things but then so could
earlier computer solutions.

AI can be filled with bias but computer systems have always been
infused with our societal biases (and we have to do better).

AI can either take away jobs or enhance productivity but the same can
be said with earlier computer innovations.

So, the call to teach how AI works is a good one but there's a level
of concern that people don't see that in a lot of ways this isn't a
revolution but a next step and as my readers know, I fell we've gotten
some serious things wrong in the roll out of teaching CS, without
acknowledging that this comes from CS begs the question, what will we
do differently, or more specifically better. 

This brings me to my next thought, and this is the bigger one - if
teachers are going to teach all our students how AI works, how are we
going to teach all those teachers?

It's clear, at least to me, that the professional development, short
form training model favored by so many for CSforAll efforts is far
from ideal. It sets up content providers and politicians to be able to
say "we've trained all our teachers in just ~n~ years" with ~n~ being
some small number but the truth is, those teachers don't really know
what they're teaching and are doing a disservice to their students in
the long run [fn:1]. We also see Computational Thinking efforts where
elementary school teachers relabel things they already do with CT
labels - debugging for error fixing, for example. This can be a
stepping stone to true CT and CS concepts but I've seen
implementations where just the labeling is considered good
enough. Worse, at times the teachers delivering these CT enhanced
lessons aren't using the CT definitions correctly.

CSforAll in New York City has been going on for nine years. Some
states are further along in bringing CS to their schools and some
started later. Still, after a decade, we have an extremely *long* way to
go. The number of high school teachers that have a deep knowledge of
CS and how to teach it still pales in comparison to other subject
areas and while elementary school teachers don't require the same
depth of knowledge, they, in my opinion, as a group are also far
behind where they should be when CS is a subject equal to all the
others.

I'm not blaming anyone for this (other than what I already said about
the acceptance and in fact enthusiasm of the short term PD model) but
rather noting that creating a new subject area from whole cloth where
those you intend to teach it never studied the subject themselves is a
multi decade process.

What's worth thinking about now though, is what are we going to do
with AI? Are we going to double down on short form PD and pay lip
service to this emerging technology? Are we going to make some serious
decisions and decide that some meaty material has to be included in
per service programs?

I'm a skeptic. In a country where public school teaching is regularly
derided and even in New York there's talk about removing the Masters
degree requirements I'm not hopeful. Will we, as a society, decide to
do what's right for all of our students or will we pay lip service
while those who are well resources continue to get further ahead.

Time will tell.


[fn:1] PD as a first step is often necessary and can be a good start
but without meaningful long form preparation as a follow up it's pure style over substance] 
