---
title: Should we be using printed textbooks?
date: 2023-11-07T08:13:44-04:00
tags:
- textbooks
categories:
- teaching 
draft: false
--- 

A couple of weeks ago a friend posted to Social media asking for a
text book recommendation. As it happened, the one he had been using
for his class was no longer going to be published. One of the replies 
was strongly against using printed text books stating that online
resources are superior.

I thought this was worth exploring.

First thing worth discussing is cost. For public K12 students this
generally isn't an issue. Schools receive (or should receive) funds
for textbooks. Students sign them out at the beginning of the semester
in each class and return them at the end. To be honest, I don't know
if any of this is now being done electronically or not but the big
issue is finding the right textbook. I wrote about that [[https://cestlaz.github.io/posts/textbooks/][here]].

At the college level, costs become an issue. Textbooks - be they
printed or online can be expensive and even the rental price can be a
reach for low income students. I've seen text books being sold for
well over one hundred dollars for really no other reason than because
they can.

Taking publisher greed out of the equation, I do believe that authors
should be fairly compensated for their work so I'm not of the school
of thought that all educational resources should be free but I'm also
sensitive to educational costs out of control.

For the sake of this post, let's take all that out of the equation and
just focus on textbook vs online resources and pretend the costs are
the same.

The principal argument against textbooks and for online resources is
that textbooks quickly become outdated while online resources are
perpetually maintained. This might be true for fast changing APIs or
rapidly evolving technologies like Javascript build systems but it
generally doesn't hold true for the materials covered in many CS
classes.

Take a data structures or algorithms text. While a standard text like
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Introduction_to_Algorithms][CLRS]] has had multiple editions over the years, a single class won't
cover the full text and the text is at its core, the same. That is to
say that CLRS has easily been useful and appropriate as a class text
for at this point, decades. The same can also be said for most algo
and DS texts. The limiting factor in terms of longevity would really
be implementation language and possibly programming style.

For data structures and algorithms, a printed text could also be
superior to an online resource - online resources on these topics
usually just present finished code and rarely developmental exposition
which can be extremely helpful to a student. A printed text also has
another advantage over even an online textbook - easier bookmarking
and random access. You can't easily flip back and forth online.

What about programming language based classes. I recently looked over
some older programming books I have. C, C++, Go, Clojure, Java,
Javascript. Ocaml, Haskel, Lisp, Racket, and Prolog. While the books
vary in overall quality from meh to great they'd all still be
perfectly servicable as class texts. Languages just don't change that
quickly.

Neither do most tech topics. Sure, you might get unlucky and purchase
a text book right before a major change and there are a few cutting
edge topics that you might want to avoid but by and large a CS text
should give you five to ten years easy.

Now, this isn't to say that an online textbook can't be great or even
superior in some ways. Online texts can be more interactive for
instance and can be updated with new assignments and projects and the
exposition can be easily updated if needs be.

All this is to say that both printed textbooks, online texts, and
other online resources can all be great and can all be important and
if cost isn't an issue, I think having a printed text can be a huge
benefit to a kid - another point of view to complement the
instructor. That said, due to cost, I ended up using online resources
extensively over my last few years of teaching.

As a final note, for online texts, do check out [[https://runestone.academy/runestone/default/user/login?_next=/runestone/default/index][Runestone]] - they
provide a number of high quality online texts for free. They don't
cover everything but for what they do, they have some great stuff.


