---
title: What they remember
date: 2024-09-06T15:10:30-04:00
tags:
- misc
categories:
- misc
draft: false
--- 

I haven't blogged for a few weeks. Part of the reason is that I
haven't felt that I've had too much to say. That's in part because
it's summer time and in part because I'm no longer teaching so that
means no new experiences with students, no new stories, and, at least
right now, no new CS education adventures. Part of it could also just
be that I'm following the trend - fewer CS Ed bloggers blogging less
frequently.

Another part of why I haven't blogged for a few weeks is that I've
decided to try to write a book. Since retiring I've had a few people
mention it to me so I thought I'd give it a go.

I've been writing a few sample chapters over the last there weeks
(around 35,000 words , 75 pages so far). The plan is to alternate
chapters - one with a story from my career followed by one on teaching
something in CS or some CS pedagogical technique. Rinse and
repeat. The "story" chapters will also have some educational message
but it won't be topic or in class specific.

We'll see where it goes. Even if it comes together I have no idea how
I would go about trying to get it published

Since my memory isn't what it was and even if it was, our memories are
malleable I decided to reach out to my network of former students. I
know that overall I've done a solid job as a CS teacher but what
specifically was memorable. I might have loved a topic or something I
did but maybe it was a flop. On the flip side, maybe there were things
that had a major impact - good or bad and I thought they were just
throwaways. I sent an email to my alumni list and posted to Facebook
asking for the stories.

What I got as a result is what made me think about the title for this
post.

Some of what I got wasn't a surprise. The competitive kids enjoyed
things related to the USACO. Some talked about some of the bigger
themes in the advanced classes. Everyone loved Halloween!!!

I was surprised though with other things that came up.

A surprisingly large number of responses singled out my "Homer the
robot" lesson - my day one or two activity for new CS students. I used
to do "Homer the Robot" in APCS when students took AP without any
prior class and then moved it to Intro once that class was established
and a requirement.

Basically, I would play the part of Homer the Robot, named after Homer
Simpson, largely due to Homer's well known mental capacity and also
because I've always been a huge Simpsons fan - remember I started
teaching this lesson or a variant of it back in the mid to late
90s. I'd set up a simple scenario - instruct Homer so that he writes
today's *aim* on the board.

They would shout out instructions and hilarity would ensue.

The idea of course was to show that computers follow simple
instructions and follow them literally. As I always tell my classes
"computers are horrible at doing what you want them to do but they're
great at doing what you tell them to do."

I'd interpret or rather, misinterpret the class's instructions but
eventually we'd get an aim on the board.

Now, I know this isn't a unique idea. I'm sure while I was coming up
with it in the 90s in New York City others were doing similar things
elsewhere. It's like pair programming. Industry "invented" the idea as
part of agile programming but just about every CS teacher ever
invented a variation of pair programming prior to industry ever
dreaming of two people on one computer every time that teacher was in
a computer lab with more students than working machines.

Nowadays you can find similar unplugged exercises a simple web search
away - things like "the paper plane exercise" or the "peanut butter
and jelly sandwich exercise" come to mind. Still, I prefer my version
but if you want to know why, you'll have to read my book if it ever
comes out :-).

When reading my student messages, I was surprised how often Homer came
up. Sure, it was fun and the class always got laughs but there were
plenty of other classes with more laughs. Maybe because it set the
stage. Many of the students who were subject to that lesson ended up
taking two and a half years of CS and many classes with me. Maybe
because it started to demystify computing. I can't say for sure but
it's something I've been thinking about. Why that lesson and not any
of the hundreds to follow.

As I said, it's interesting what they remember.

Another theme that came up in more responses than I would have
expected didn't refer to a lesson, any particular activity, or
story. It had to do with the CS class, or in many cases, the CS office
area - room 301, being a "safe space." Interesting because I don't
think people even used that term back in the day. I found that
interesting because first, it again came from more students than I
would have expected. Second, it also came from some people who were
never my student but are now in my network. They were never in my
class but still found there way to the CS corner of Stuy. Third, I
never thought I did anything special or even really thought about
making a "safe space," particularly since that can mean very different
things to different people.

Those were the two biggest surprises. Not that they were mentioned but
that they were mentioned more than I would have expected.

There were plenty of other responses. Some I expected and some not and
lots of good memory triggers as I stroll down memory lane.

With the new semester starting for teachers around the country it's
worth spending a minute thinking about it - you'll all have an impact
teaching your subject area but you'll also have an impact in ways you
probably wouldn't think about.

Have a great semester everybody!!!!








